GOVERNMENTOF TAMIL NADU
PROSPECTUS
FOR ADMISSION TO BSMS / BAMS / BHMS COURSES
ALL INDIA QUOTA SEATS
IN SELF FINANCING I.M&H. MEDICAL COLLEGES
IN THE STATE OF TAMILNADU
2025 - 2026 Session
(As per G.O (D)No. 695/Health and Family Welfare [IM1-2] Dept.,
dated 30-06-2025 and as amended from time to time)
LAST DATE FOR SUBMISSION OF FILLED IN APPLICATION
08-08-2025 up to 5.00 P.M.
SELECTION COMMITTEE,
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY,
ARIGNAR ANNA GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL OF INDIAN MEDICINE CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI – 600 106.
Phone No: 044-26216244
Website: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in
www.tnayushselection.org.
1
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
1 Date of Notification 24-07-2025
Date of Commencement of online
2 24-07-2025
application
Last date for online submission of
3 08-08-2025
application
4 Date of Declaration of Rank list Will be posted in the official website.
5 Details of counselling Will be posted in the official website
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in
6 Official website
www.tnayushselection.org
7 Helpline Number 044-26216244
2
INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
1. Application for TN State 2025-2026 UG (BSMS / BAMS / BHMS) Counselling can only
be submitted online through Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee website
www.tnayushselection.org. Application submitted through any other mode shall not
be entertained.
2. a. The registration fee for the application form is Rs.1000/- (Rupees One thousand
Only) (non-refundable) and it should be paid through online Bank payment portal
in the website.
b. The last date for submission of online application form will be upto 5:00
P.M. on 08-08-2025. Thereafter there is no provision for the candidates to
submit their online application form.
c. Candidates should fill up all mandatory columns, upload all required documents
and submit the duly filled in online application. The candidates may download
their filled in online application form and secure a copy of the same for their
future reference. Subsequent submission of supporting document(s), is not
accepted either on courier / post / or in person.
3. a. Qualified and eligible candidates are required to register ONLINE on the Tamil Nadu
AYUSH Selection Committee website www.tnayushselection.org to participate in
the counselling process for allotment of seat. Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection
Committee does not allot any seat manually.
b. Candidates are deemed to have read, agreed and accepted this Prospectus and the
terms and conditions of the counselling mentioned in this prospectus for Tamil
Nadu State 2025-2026 UG (BSMS / BAMS / BHMS) courses Counselling on
completing the online submission of application form.
c. Candidates are further advised to fill the application form on their own on
the Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee website and not through any agent
or third party. Any mistake committed by the candidate will prejudice one’s
selection.
3
4. The admissions in the State of Tamil Nadu are as per the provisions of the Government
of Tamil Nadu and in compliance to the National Commission for Indian System of
Medicine (NCISM) and the National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) and shall be
solely based on marks obtained in the National Eligibility-Cum-Entrance Test (NEET
(UG) – 2025) conducted by National Testing Agency (NTA).
5. As per the prevailing regulations, the seat matrices for admission in the Self-Financing
Institutions shall be fifteen percent for the All India Quota for the academic year 2025
- 2026.
6. Use one common application form for all courses, namely,
a. Bachelor of Siddha Medicine & Surgery [ B.S.M.S ]
b. Bachelor of Ayurveda Medicine & Surgery [ B.A.M.S ]
c. Bachelor of Homoeopathy Medicine &Surgery [ B.H.M.S ]
7. Before filling up the Application form, read all the instructions carefully. Fill up the
Application form on their own and not through any agent or third party. Any mistake
committed by the candidate will prejudice one’s selection.
8. Provisional Rank list of the eligible candidates, counselling schedule etc., will be posted
in the official website: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org The
Application Registration Number (A.R. No.) will appear in the Rank List.
9. For latest updates, the candidates are instructed to remain in touch with the official
website www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org frequently from the date
of application till the end of admission process. Further any change or modification
and relevant information pertaining to this counselling / admission process will be
made available only on the official website.
10. wSeelebcstiitoenw eCbosmitme iottneley . will not be responsible for the consequences, resulting due to
non-diligent follow-up of notices, notifications and publications appearing on the
websites regarding counselling and admission to BSMS / BAMS / BHMS Degree
Courses under All India Quota in Self Financing ISM medical colleges for
2025 – 2026 Session.
11. Candidates are advised to read the Information Bulletin for NEET- UG 2025 issued by
the National Testing Agency (NTA) and to carefully go through the instructions
regarding NEET UG–2025; and visit the website www.ntaneet.nic.in regarding
detailed qualifying criteria.
4
12. The candidates allotted to B.S.M.S./B.A.M.S./B.H.M.S course under All
India Quota in Self-Financing Colleges through Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Arumbakkam,
Chennai, will alone be registered for UG Course in The Tamil Nadu Dr.
M.G.R. Medical University.
13. This Prospectus is applicable for All India Quota seats in Self-Financing
Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Colleges in Tamil Nadu.
14. PAYMENT DETAILS
Christians
OC/BC/ converted
Description SC/SCA/ST TIME
BCM/MBC from
SC/SCA/ST
Registration fee for
1000 While applying
online application
Online Processing fee 1000 Before choice filling
1. Rs. 10000 / - at
Free the time of
Advance Tuition fees
(If income is less than 2.5 submission of
for Self-Financing 25000
lakhs with valid Income choice filling.
Colleges under (10000 +
Certificate). Only for Tamil 2. Rs. 15000/- at
Government 15000)
Nadu Native students. the time of
Surrendered seats
downloading
allotment order.
5
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
PROSPECTUS
1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: -
Candidate should be a citizen of India.
2 AGE LIMIT (For Details kindly refer clause 5.1.1. of NEET UG – 2025 Bulletin)
No candidate shall be admitted to BSMS / BAMS / BHMS Degree Course unless one
st
has attained the age of Seventeen Years on or before the 31 December 2025 of
his/her admission to the first year of the undergraduate AYUSH courses and there is
no upper age limit. (Evidence for the age e.g. birth certificate, 10th mark sheet should
be uploaded).
3 COMMUNITY CERTIFICATE:
a. Candidates should produce Community Certificate obtained from the
Revenue authorities of their respective districts with competent jurisdiction as
detailed below:
S. No. Name of the Community Issuing Authority
1. Scheduled Tribe (ST) Revenue Divisional Officer of their native
place or Sub-Collector of their Districts
(except Chennai) or P.A (General) to Collector
of Chennai. The Community Certificate card
issued by Tahsildars upto 11.11.89 is valid.
2. Scheduled Caste (SC) / Tahsildar of Native Taluk of the C andidate
Scheduled Caste
Arunthathiyar (SCA)
3. Backward Class (BC) / Headquarters Deputy Tahsildar / Zonal
Backward Class Muslim Deputy Tahsildar / Deputy Tahsildar
(BCM) / Most Backward (Certificates)
Class (MBC) / Denotified
Communities (DNC)
b. The candidature claimed after submission of application without Community
Certificate will be treated only as Open category.
6
c. If a candidate of Tamil Nadu origin obtains community certificate from other
state, candidates will be considered under Open Category only if candidates
fulfils the norms otherwise.
d. If a candidate submits a false / fabricated Community Certificate, Nativity
Certificate or any other Certificate, if it is found at a later point during the course
of the study, it will result in expulsion of the candidate from the course and also
legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated against the candidate and
their parents as per provision of law.
4 EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS:
(i) Admissions to all State Quota seats of Undergraduate Ayurveda, Siddha and
Homoeopathy Courses will be done through NEET (UG) – 2025 as per the
provisions of the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine
(Minimum Standards of Undergraduate Ayurveda Education), Regulations
2022, National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (Minimum
Standards of Undergraduate Siddha Education), Regulations 2022 and
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine and National Commission
for Homoeopathy (Homoeopathy Graduate Degree Course – BHMS)
Regulations 2022 (NCISM & NCH are Regulatory Bodies of the above-
mentioned Courses under the Ministry of AYUSH).
(ii) In order to be eligible for admission to BSMS / BAMS / BHMS Degree courses
for this academic year, it shall be necessary for a candidate to obtain
minimum of marks at 50th Percentile in NEET UG-2025. However in respect of
candidates belonging to OBC / SC / ST, the minimum marks shall be at 40th
Percentile in NEET UG - 2025. In respect of candidates with Persons with
Benchmark disabilities (enclose the disability certificate as per Annexure-I)
alone the minimum marks shall be at 45th Percentile for General Category
candidates and 40th Percentile for OBC / SC / ST candidates in NEET UG-2025.
Note: Provided further that where sufficient number of candidates in the respective
category fail to secure minimum marks in the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test
(NEET) held for any academic year for admission to undergraduate programme, the
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine & National Commission for
7
Homoeopathy, in consultation with the Central Government may at its discretion
lower the minimum marks required for admission to undergraduate programme for
candidates belonging to respective category and marks so lowered by the Central
Government shall be applicable for that academic year only.
(iii) Further, to be eligible for admission to BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS Degree
courses, Candidates must have passed in all the subjects of the qualifying
examination of the Higher Secondary Certificate Examination (Academic)
conducted by the Tamil Nadu State Board or any other equivalent Board with
the subjects of Physics, Chemistry, Biology / Botany and Zoology / Bio-
technology and English
(iv) The Candidate shall have passed H.SC (or equivalent) with Physics,
Chemistry, Biology or Biotechnology. The minimum standards of UG
regulations stands withdrawn for eligibility criteria for ASU courses as per
letter Ref. No BOA/2-B/UG/2025 dt. 11-07-2025 from Secretary NCISM.
NOTE:-Candidates who have passed any other equivalent examinations other
than the Tamil Nadu State Board Examination, CBSE and ISCE with same
subjects as mentioned above in clause 4 (iii) should produce the eligibility
certificate from The Tamil Nadu Dr. MGR Medical University before the
counselling date or before attending the counselling.
(v) Candidates qualified in the NEET (UG) - 2025 and who have passed the
qualifying examinations from National Institute of Open Schooling or State
Open Schools or as private candidates from recognized State Boards; or with
Biology/Biotechnology as an additional subject shall be allowed but subject to
the outcome of Special Leave Petitions/ Appeals filed by the Medical Council
of India. (As per NEET (UG) 2025 Guidelines).
Note:* “The proviso in italics has been a subject matter of challenge before the
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, and
Hon’ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur. The provisions of the regulations
disqualifying recognized Open School Board candidates and the candidates who have
studied Biology/Biotechnology as an Additional Subject has been struck down.”
8
(vi) Language qualification for BSMS Course
In addition to the required minimum percentile in the NEET UG - 2025.
a. The candidate should have studied in Tamil medium up to X or XII Standard.
b. The candidate should have studied Tamil as a subject up to X or XII Standard.
c. The candidate must be prepared to pursue the study of Tamil Language as
a subject during the First professional course of B.S.M.S. course, to become
eligible to take the other subjects examination of the BSMS Course.
5 INELIGIBILITY CRITERIA:
The following categories of candidates are NOT ELIGIBLE to apply for B.S.M.S. /
B.A.M.S. / B.H.M.S. Courses.
a. Candidates who have passed H.Sc. in Vocational Stream and who have passed
Pre-University Course in Tamil Nadu.
b. The selection and admission of candidates of other than those in Clause 4 (iii)
will be provisional subject to recognition of the qualifying examination by the
Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University under which the candidate gets
admitted. In case, the recognition is not accorded for the admission of the
candidate on any grounds, the provisional admission will not entitle the
candidate for the continuance of the course and the admission will be
cancelled.
c. Candidates presently pursuing any of the B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S. / B.H.M.S. Courses
are NOT ELIGIBLE to apply respectively for the same Courses during this
academic year.
d. Candidates declared ineligible by AACCC website are not eligible for further
counselling after the date of announcement of ineligibility.
6
The tentative lists of Self-Financing Medical Colleges are furnished with the details of
Courses offered and Tentative seats available under All India Quota in the Annexure– I.
7 DURATION OF THE BSMS / BAMS / BHMS COURSES:
Five and half (5 1/2) years of study including one year Compulsory Rotatory
Residential Internship.
9
8 PROCEDURE FOR FILLING AND SUBMISSION OF ONLINE APPLICATION FORM:
1. The candidates are advised to take a print out of the Prospectus from the
official website and read it carefully, along with the parent / guardian before
filling up the online application form for the academic year 2025-2026.
2. The candidate should log into the following website: www.tnayushselection.org
3. The candidates must pay non-refundable registration fee for online
application fees as Rs. 1,000/- (Rupees one thousand only).
4. The application forms will be available online from 24.07.2025 onwards
till 08.08.2025 upto 5:00 P.M.
5. Candidates have to fill all the mandatory columns in the online application. All
the relevant documents should be uploaded in PDF format. Candidates are
instructed to submit the online application after filling up all the required fields.
6. Request for change in any particulars after submitting the online application
form shall not be entertained under any circumstances.
7. Candidates are instructed to upload the following certificates while filling the
online application form and submit.
i. NEET- UG 2025 Admit card and Score card.
ii. Class X Mark Sheet (both sides of Certificate) / Birth Certificate.
iii. Class XI Mark Sheet (both sides of Certificate).
iv. H.S.C. Mark sheet (both sides of Mark Sheet) or any other
equivalent examination.
v. Transfer certificate obtained after the completion of H.S.C. or
equivalent examinations or any other courses.
vi. Community Certificate (if applicable).
vii. Valid Income Certificate of parent for the candidates claiming fee
exemption (for native of Tamil Nadu Candidates only).
viii. Eligibility Certificate obtained from the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University, Guindy, Chennai for the candidate of other Universities /
Boards (except State Board, CBSE Board & ISCE Board).
ix. Front page of the Bank Pass Book or cancelled cheque leaf of the
candidate / guardian (for refund purpose).
x. Court orders (if any).
xi. Additional supporting documents (if any).
10
Note: After submitting the filled in online application, the candidates are advised to
download their filled in online application form for future reference.
8. All the entries in the online application form should be filled by the candidate
carefully. The candidate should ensure that all information including the marks
in the qualifying examination furnished by the candidate in the application and
the enclosures are true and correct. The candidate is informed that after
proper scrutiny of the application, if the marks furnished by the candidate in
the application are not correct or any other information is found to be
incorrect, then;
a. Candidates will forfeit the admission, no matter at what stage
of the course, at that time;
b. Candidates will be debarred from pursuing any other course for
a period of three years;
c. Legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated against the
candidate along with their parents/guardian for furnishing false
Mark Sheet / false Community Certificate.
9. Even if the candidate is provisionally selected for the ASH admission but found
to have failed in +1 examination, the provisional admission of the candidate
automatically stands cancelled.
10. Instructions for filling the Online Application Form:
i. The candidate and the parent / guardian must ensure candidates
eligibility criteria before submitting the online application form.
The candidates are instructed to go through the Prospectus
carefully and be clear about all the instructions with regard to the
submission of the online application form.
ii. The application form other than the one filled in online mode will
not be accepted, under any circumstances.
11. Candidate should login to the following website to access application form for
ASH Courses 2025-2026 session. www.tnayushselection.org
12. Candidate should fill the following particulars in the online application form:
1. Aadhar Number of the candidate
2. Name of the candidate
3. Name of the Parent / Guardian
4. Permanent Address / Address for communication
5. Mobile No.
11
6. Email ID
7. Gender
8. Date of Birth
9. Community, Caste and details
10. Religion
11. Mother tongue
12. Nationality
13. Nativity
14. NEET – Roll Number, Register Number, Score,
All India NEET Rank and number of Attempts in NEET.
15. Qualifying Examination, +2 Roll. No., Year of passing Class EMIS No.
16. Medium of Instruction
17. Marks details
18. Whether studied in Tamil Medium up to X Std. or Higher Secondary course
19. Details of Nativity
20. Parent Occupation
21. Annual income of the parent
22. Civic details
23. Native district
24. Eligibility Certificate (if applicable)
25. Uploading documents
a. Same passport size photograph which was uploaded in NEET UG-2025
examination must be uploaded in the online application form. It should be
submitted at the time of admission at the allotted ASH College.
b. The candidates should upload their signature in running hand writing
(4 kb to 20 kb) in the appropriate box given in the online application form.
Placing initials as signature is not acceptable. Writing full name in the box in
capital letters would also not be accepted as signature and the application
form would be rejected.
12
c. The candidates must ensure that photograph and signature are uploaded in
the respective fields.
13. Candidates are instructed to submit only one application form.
14. Candidates should ensure that all information entered in the online application
are correct at the time of online submission of application form.
15. Incomplete applications and applications not in accordance with instruction will
not be considered and are liable to be rejected. The application fee once paid
will not be refunded.
16. Submission of online application and remittance of fee would close as per the
schedule given and no request for extension of time shall be entertained.
Application once submitted cannot be withdrawn.
9 METHOD OF FEE PAYMENT:
i. Mode of payment through Debit Card / Credit card / Net banking / UPI Wallet
(G -pay, Pay Tm) Necessary facilities have been provided for making payment
through payment portal by using Net Banking or other modes
ii. Candidates must note that mere deduction of fee from the Bank account is not
a proof of fee payment.
iii. Check the validity of the Debit card / Credit card and keep everything ready
while logging on to the website for submitting application form. Candidate
should enter the information asked for and make payment through the portal.
iv. The Advance tuition fees will be refunded to the candidate who has been
allotted a seat and not joined in 1st and 2nd round of counselling only to the
account whose details are provided along with the application form.
v. The advance Tuition Fees paid to the Selection Committee will be adjusted
towards the Tuition fee that has to be paid to the college, after the conduct
of Registration Sub-Committee meeting by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M G R Medical
University to get adjusted against the Tuition Fees to be paid by the
candidates whose names are registered by the University.
vi. The Candidates who discontinue the course after joining, at any stage within
the cut-off date will forfeit all the fees including the Advance Tuition fee paid
by him/her.
13
vii. All payments including the advance Tuition fee will be forfeited if a candidate
who has been allotted a seat in the Round 3 or subsequent Rounds and does
not join the respective institution. Also, the advance Tuition fee will be
forfeited if the admission gets cancelled due to any reason. E.g. in case, the
candidate gives wrong information at the time of registration and on the basis
of which a seat may be allotted and later cancelled by the Admission
Authorities or at the time of reporting the candidate fails to produce the
required documents (within stipulated time).
10
METHOD OF SELECTION AND ADMISSION:
i. The admission shall be made on the basis of National Eligibility-cum-Entrance
Test NEET UG-2025 score for B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S. / B.H.M.S. Courses for the year
2025 - 2026 for the Seats under All India Quota in Self Financing Indian Medicine
and Homoeopathy Medical Colleges.
ii. Provisional Rank List of the eligible candidates shall be prepared on the basis of
the marks obtained in NEET UG-2025. Further, Secretary, Selection Committee
will publish the tentative rank list on the following official website:
www.tnayushselection.org and candidates shall be admitted to the above
courses from the said rank list ONLY.
11 All selections and admissions for BSMS / BAMS / BHMS Courses are only provisional.
The Selection and admission is liable to be cancelled at any time as and when the
eligibility conditions are found to be defective or incorrect or of any suppression of
facts deliberately or otherwise. The right of allotment to BSMS / BAMS / BHMS
courses and Colleges is vested totally with the Selection Committee.
12 COUNSELLING:
a. Selection of candidate will be done only through online counselling based on
Provisional Rank List.
b. Selection Committee is the designated authority for counselling for all
admissions to undergraduate courses in Siddha, Ayurveda and Homoeopathy
medicine in all Government, Self-financing ASH Institutions of Tamil Nadu.
c. No authority or institution shall admit any candidate to the undergraduate
course in contravention of the criteria or procedure as laid down by NCISM /
14
NCH in respect of admissions and any candidate admitted in contravention of
the said criteria or procedure shall be discharged.
d. The authority or Institution which grants admission to any student in
contravention of the criteria or procedure shall be liable to face action in terms
of provisions of the NCISM and NCH Regulation 2022.
e. Selection will be made based on NEET UG-2025 score and Neet rank list during
counselling. Counselling schedule will be available only on the official website:
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.com.
f. Candidates who fail to fill the choice in any round within the stipulated time as
mentioned in the selection committee official website, for whatsoever reasons,
will be given a chance to fill their choice and lock them in the subsequent round
of the existing available vacancies only irrespective of their provisional rank.
g. Candidates who are getting allotment, for any other reasons, at a later date or
time after the counselling / individual’s turn is over will be given a seat in the
existing vacancies available in any one of the colleges irrespective of their merit
of marks.
h. The candidate is eligible to opt for any courses viz. BSMS/BAMS/BHMS course in
Self-Financing colleges based on the availability of seats during his/her turn.
i. Seat under All India Quota (AIQ) will be open in nature and there shall not be any
requirement for domicile in a particular State / UT or passing of 10+2 in a
particular State / UT.
j. The Rules and regulations of National Commission for Indian System of Medicine
(NCISM) / National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) for All India Quota seats
and the State Policy shall be made applicable to the All India Quota Seats in Self
Financing Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Medical Colleges.
k. All Communications regarding Counselling will be displayed / available through
the official website only and any change or modification and relevant
information pertaining to this admission process will be made available
immediately on the website www.tnayushselection.org
l. The candidates are instructed to visit the website at least two times a day for
updates from the date of release of application till the end of admission process
without fail. Selection Committee will not be responsible for consequences
resulting due to non-diligent follow-up of notices, notification and publications
appearing on the website regarding admission to B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S. / B.H.M.S.
Courses under All Quota 2025 - 2026 session.
15
m. Counselling/allotment for the seats newly created due to provision of seat
matrix after the commencement of first round counselling by the Tamil Nadu
Dr. MGR Medical University or due to the orders/interim orders passed by the
Hon’ble High Court Madras after the commencement of Round 1 counselling will
be done only during 2nd round of counselling, but within the cut-off date of UG
Courses admission as laid down by the regulatory bodies viz. MoA/NCISM/NCH.
n. Mutual transfers will not be allowed under any circumstances.
o. The candidate is eligible to opt for any of the courses viz. BSMS / BAMS / BHMS
under All India Quota in Self-financing colleges based on his/her eligibility and
merit marks obtained in NEET 2025.
p. Those who obtained allotment order to a particular course in a Self-Financing
college under All India Quota during the counselling do not join within the
stipulated time to that particular course and college to which they are allotted,
will not be considered for admission at any point of time later.
q. Counselling schedule will be made available on the website only.
13 ROUNDS OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
There are two Rounds of counselling
I. Round 1
II. Round 2
III. Round 3
IV. Round 4
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR COUNSELLING:
• At the time of choice filling all the candidates must pay non-refundable
online processing fee for All India Quota seats in Self-financing ASH Medical
Colleges – Rs. 1000/- (Rupees one thousand only)
• At the time of choice filling candidate should pay refundable advance tuition
fees Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten thousand only).
• This advance tuition fees amount will not be refunded after allotment of seats
in third round of counselling.
• For All India Quota seats in Self-Financing ASH Colleges advance tuition fees
Rs.10,000/- is exempted for “SC/SCA/ST/BC (Converted to Christianity) from
Scheduled Caste, candidates, if annual income is less than 2.5 Lakhs” (It is
applicable for Native of Tamil Nadu Candidates only).
16
I. The counselling Schedule will be available in the official Website
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org
II. Candidates are instructed to register and Choice lock the seats for each Round
of counselling within the stipulated date and time as mentioned in the
counselling Schedule.
III. Candidates should be careful while choice filling and it is advisable to choose
preferred colleges only.
IV. Candidate could edit their Choice(s) but once the candidate locks their
choice(s) during the online counselling, it cannot be changed later.
V. Candidates are advised not to share Login ID, Password and OTP with others.
VI. Mutual transfer/Individual request for transfer of college will NOT be permitted
under any circumstances.
VII. Provisionally selected candidates can download the provisional allotment order
paying the additional advance tuition fee Rs.15,000/- (Rupees five thousand
only). The balance tuition fee should be paid at the time of admission to the
college.
VIII. For All India Quota seats in Self-Financing ASH Colleges tuition fees is exempted
for “SC/SCA/ST/BC (Converts to Christianity) from Scheduled Caste,
candidates, if annual income is less than 2.5 Lakhs” at the time of
downloading the allotment order (It is applicable for candidates who are
native of Tamil Nadu).
IX. Candidates who joined in Round 3 of All India Quota or State Quota shall not be
eligible to participate in the further Rounds of All India Quota Counselling for
this academic year (i.e) 2025-2026 as per information bulletin of NCISM.
“Kindly note that Medical Counselling Committee of NCISM MoHFW has developed
Software for all the participating States / Counselling Authorities for NEET-UG to
upload the name and Roll numbers of students who have joined upto Round-3 and
further Rounds of the State Quota or Round-3 of NCISM of the All India Quota on the
common portal.”
17
I. ROUND 1 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
a. The candidates should pay a non-refundable amount Rs.1000/- (Rupees one
thousand only) towards online Processing Fee and Advance tuition fees
(Refundable) amount Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand Only) should be paid
during choice filling via online Bank payment portal.
b. A candidate who has taken a seat and Not Joined/ Resigned the course within
the stipulated time will be eligible to attend the subsequent Rounds of online
counselling for the academic year 2025-2026.
c. Re-allotment is permitted during the Round 2 & Round 3 of counselling based on
rank.
d. If a candidate fails to join the College within the stipulated time, in the Round 1
or Round 2 of counselling candidates will be permitted to participate in the
Round 2 or Round 3 of online counselling respectively.
II. ROUND 2 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
a. Candidates who had locked their choices Round-1 and did not get any seat
allotted are not required to lock their choice again. Also, candidates who have
allotted the seat in Round-1, but not joined in the college need not lock their
choice again. Candidate who have allotted the seat in round-1 and joined the
college and wish to opt for upgradation need not lock their choice again.
b. Fresh choice filling is permitted in this Round for those candidates who have
not locked their choices in Round-1 (with the payment of processing fee and
advance tuition fee).
c. Candidate who wishes to retain their seats (who don’t want a change in
college) need not participate in Round-2.
d. If upgraded in Round 2, the candidate has to relinquish the seat from Round 1
and join the seat allotted in Round 2.
e. Candidates should be careful while choice filling and it is advisable to choose
preferred colleges only.
f. Candidate could edit their Choice(s) but once the candidate locks their
choice(s) during the online counselling, it cannot be changed later.
g. If the candidate is reallotted in Round 2, then the BSMS / BAMS / BHMS seats
allotted to candidates during Round 1 of Counselling will be allotted to other
18
candidates in descending order, not in ascending order.
h. A candidate who has taken a seat and not joined/ resigned the course within
the stipulated time will be eligible to attend the subsequent Rounds of online
counselling for the academic year 2025-2026.
i. If the candidate has joined but Discontinued the course after the stipulated
date of resignation he /she will be eligible to attend the Round-3 of online
counselling for the academic year 2025-2026, but they will have to forfeit the
registration fee and tuition fees paid by him/her.
j. Candidates who are allotted seats in Round 1 but who don’t report or join in
the allotted institute can participate in further Rounds (without forfeiture).
k. Candidates getting upgraded in Round 2 shall NOT have any claim on
Round 1 seat.
Virtual vacancies: Any candidate who has been allotted a seat in Round 1 and has
opted for upgradation in Round 2 that allotted seat of Round 1 will be shown as
virtual vacancy in Round 2 and all candidates can fill their choice for the said seat
during the choice filling in Round 2. However, such seats will be allotted in Round 2,
only if the allotted candidate of Round 1 vacates/upgrades in Round 2 then that
virtual vacancy becomes a real vacancy.
III.ROUND - 3 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
When a candidate is scheduled to attend the Round-3 online counselling, then the
candidate has to pay the Processing Fee of Rs.1000/- (non-refundable) via online Bank
payment portal. The candidates who have already paid the Processing fees during
previous Rounds of counselling need not pay again if they have not been allotted
seats.
ELIGIBLE CANDIDATES FOR ROUND-3:
a. Candidates who locked their choice in Round-1 or Round-2 and did not get
any seat allotted are not required to lock their choice again.
b. Fresh choice filling is permitted for Round-3 those candidates who have
not locked their choice in Round-1 or Round-2 (with the payment of
processing and advance tuition fees).
19
c. If upgraded from Round 1 or Round 2, the candidate must get relieved
from Round-1 or Round-2 seat and join Round 3 seat.
d. Candidates who joined in Round 3 of All India Quota or State Quota shall
not be eligible to participate in the further Rounds for All India Quota or
State Quota for this academic year (i.e) 2025-2026 as per information
bulletin NCISM.
e. Once the candidate joins the seat allotted in Round 3, he/she cannot
upgrade or resign from this seat.
f. If any candidate does not join the Round 3 allotted seat, candidate will
have to forfeit the online processing fee, advance tuition fees paid by
him/her. And they will also be not eligible to participate in the subsequent
Rounds of counselling.
IV.STRAY ROUND OF COUNSELLING:
a. Stray vacancies if arises after the third round of Counselling, Stray vacancy
counselling will be conducted by the Selection Committee as per the
directions of the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy and
also as per the guidelines of NCISM (National Commission For Indian
System Medicine) / NCH (National Commission Of Homoeopathy).
b. Fresh registration is allowed in this Stray round with the payment of non-
refundable registration fee for online application RS.500 (Rupees five
hundred only)
c. At the time of choice filling, all the candidates must pay non-refundable
online processing fee of Rs. 500/- (Rupees five hundred only).
d. At the time of choice locking candidate should pay advance tuition fee of
Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) to participate in stray round or
subsequent round (if any) via online bank payment portal which is not
refundable.
e. For Self-Financing AUSH Colleges, Advance tuition fee is exempted for
“SC/SCA/ST/BC (Converted to Christianity) from Scheduled Caste, candidates, if
annual income is less than 2.5 Lakhs” at the time of choice locking and
20
downloading the allotment order (Applicable only for the candidates who are
belongs to native of Tamil Nadu).
f. Candidates who are not holding any seats in ASH course will be eligible to
participate in this Counselling.
g. Candidates who have joined in All India and State Quota seats for AUSH will not
be eligible to participate in this counselling.
h. If the seat is allocated in stray vacancy the candidate has to download the
allotment order and join in the college within the stipulated date and time
as mentioned in the order. To download allotment, order the candidate
should pay an additional tuition fees of Rs.15,000/- (Rupees fifteen
thousand only).
i. If the candidate fails to download the allotment order or downloaded the
allotment order and fails to join the college within the stipulated date and
time his/her advance tuition fees will be forfeited. They also will not be
able to participate in TN AUSH Counselling for subsequent one academic
year.
j. If a candidate joined the college and discontinued the course the
candidate should pay the Discontinuation fee of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one
lakh only) and the paid tuition fees will not be refunded.
k. Allotted candidates during Stray vacancy Round, if they fail to join they will
have to forfeit the Advance tuition fees. They also will not be able to
participate in Tamil Nadu ASH Counselling for subsequent one academic
year.
l. If it is found that a candidate is/was involved in impersonation /
suppression or misrepresentation of facts and production of falsified /
bogus certificates, his/her provisional allotment order will be cancelled
and legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated.
m. If during the NEET 2025 or at any stage of allotment / admission process of
ASH Admission in Tamil Nadu 2025-2026 or in the admission process of
ASH course in Tamil Nadu 2025-2026 at the allotted College, the candidate
21
has indulged in any case of impersonation i.e. not matching the
photograph /signature / documents of the candidate etc., He/She shall be
handed over to the Police by the Principal / The Commissioner of Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy, as the case may be and the cases shall be
dealt as per the Indian Penal Code for further investigation. Such
candidates will be debarred permanently from appearing for the ASH
Admission in Tamil Nadu in future in addition to the cancellation of his/her
candidature in the medical admission in Tamil Nadu.
n. The Selection Committee will not be responsible for approvals
obtained/annual renewals and other applicable statutory approvals of
various authorities including NCISM (National Commission For Indian
System Medicine) / NCH (National Commission Of Homoeopathy),
infrastructure and the rules and regulations of the Self-Financing Private
ASH Medical Colleges. Hence, candidates are advised to go through the
respective college websites and NCISM (NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR
INDIAN SYSTEM MEDICINE) / NCH (NATIONAL COMMISSION OF
HOMOEOPATHY) websites and satisfy themselves before giving their
option for selection of such seats by the candidates. The Selection
Committee shall neither be responsible nor shall entertain any case on the
above grounds.
Note: The vacancies arising after the stray round of counselling will be kept vacant.
14 Counselling / Allotment for the seats newly created due to provision of seat matrix
after the commencement of first round counselling by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R.
Medical University or due to the orders / interim orders passed by the Honorable High
Court Madras after the commencement of 1st round counselling will be done ONLY
during the 2nd round counselling but within the cutoff date for UG Courses admission
as laid down by the regulatory bodies ie., NCISM (National Commission for Indian
System Medicine) & NCH (National Commission of Homoeopathy) / Ministry of
AYUSH.
22
15 FEE STRUCTURE
Sl.No. Course
The Fee Structure for Self-Financing Colleges
(Per Annum) for the year 2025 - 2026 -
1 BSMS Rs.1,25,000/- (inclusive of Tuition fee,
Admission fee, Special fee, Laboratory /
Computer / Internet fee, Library fee, Sports fee,
Maintenance and Amenities fee, extracurricular
2 BAMS
activities fee, and other recurring expenditure,
as fixed by the Committee on Fixation of Fee in
respect of Self-Financing Colleges from time to
3 BHMS
time).
(a) Detailed information regarding Caution Deposit, Scholarship, Fee Concession,
Hostel Fees,( if availed), University Registration Fees, Examination Fees, etc. can
be obtained from the Head of the Institution in which the candidate joins.
(b) All the candidates attending Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy UG courses
counselling for All India Quota seats will have to remit a non-refundable amount
of Rs.1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) towards online processing fee for
Counselling before choice filling.
(c) The students of SC / SCA / ST and Converted Christian whose parental annual
income is less than Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two lakh Fifty Thousand only) are
exempted from payment of only the advance tuition fees. The fees so exempted
shall be claimed under the scholarship program (As per G.O.Ms. No. 06/ Adi
Dravidar and Tribal Welfare Department, dated 09-01-2012). Candidates should
furnish supportive documents like valid Income Certificate and Community
Certificate obtained from the competent authority.
15 All the entries in the application form should be uploaded by the candidate in his/her
own and not through any agent and third party. The candidate should ensure that all
information including the marks in the qualifying examination furnished by him/her in
the application and the enclosure are correct. The candidate is informed that after
23
proper scrutiny of his/her application, it is found that the marks furnished by him/her
in the application are not correct or any other information is found to be incorrect,
then;
a. He / She will forfeit the admission no matter at what stage of the course he / she
will be at that time;
b. He / She will be debarred from pursuing any studies for a period of three years;
c. Legal action will be initiated against the candidate and the parents for furnishing
incorrect information;
d. Criminal action will be instituted against him/her for furnishing false Mark
Sheets etc.,
16 The selection and admission of candidates of other Universities / Boards will be
provisional subject to recognition of the qualifying examination by The Tamil Nadu Dr.
M.G.R. Medical University under which the candidate gets admitted. In case, the
recognition is not accorded for the admission of the candidate on any ground, the
provisional admission will not entitle the candidate for the continuance of the course
and the admission will stand cancelled.
17 The Selected Candidates should produce all the original documents at the time of
admission to the Principal of the Medical Colleges concerned. Selection will be
cancelled if the candidates do not produce the original documents at the time of
admission.
18 Selected candidates should produce a Physical Fitness Certificate obtained from a
Registered Medical Practitioner not below the rank of Assistant Surgeon or “A” Class
practitioner Registered with Tamil Nadu Board of Indian Medicine or Board of
Integrated Medicine or Tamil Nadu Siddha Medical Council, Chennai or Tamil Nadu
Homoeopathy Medical Council, at the time of joining the course.
19 Candidates selected for admission to BSMS/BAMS/BHMS Courses are not guaranteed
any appointment in Government Service.
20 Hepatitis-B vaccination:
All candidates selected for admission to first year BSMS / BAMS / BHMS course
should take the Hepatitis-B Vaccine before admission to these Courses and only on
24
producing a certificate in Annexure – II, the Principals will admit the candidates. The
students should take further doses at the prescribed intervals as required.
21 DISCONTINUATION FEES:
(i) Candidates selected for admission and his/her parent /guardian will have to
execute an Agreement Bond as prescribed in Annexure–III Failure to execute the
Agreement Bond will lead to cancellation of selection.
(ii) Candidates who discontinue the course on or after the last cut off date for
admission process for the academic session 2025 - 2026 and on any date of the
subsequent years are bound by the bond and thereby they shall have to pay a
sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only) as penalty for having breached the
contract in the bond by means of Demand Draft in favour of “The commissioner
of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai-106” payable at Chennai.
Note: This penalty is only for candidates who discontinue the course and not for re-
allotment and movement from one to another category.
22 Candidates selected for admission and his / her parent / guardian will have to sign
Discipline Declaration form in Annexure IV and failure to sign the declaration will
result in the cancellation of selection.
23 Enquiry or any correspondence regarding the selection of candidates will not be
entertained.
24 Ragging: The Candidates who join BSMS/BAMS/ BHMS Course should not indulge or
participate in any kind of ragging. If they are found to have indulged in ragging in past
or noticed later, the candidates will be removed from roll of institution at whatever
stage of study and criminal action will be taken against the candidates.
25 If proof of Authenticity of Certificate could not be obtained by the Institution on time,
the candidate will not be allowed to continue the 2nd year of study.
26 The Government orders issued and to be issued from time to time pertaining to any of
the matters contained in the prospectus should be read as part and parcel of this
prospectus and such terms and conditions in the Government order are deemed to
have been incorporated in this prospectus.
27 No admission, re-allotment / transfer shall be made after cut-off date for the academic
year as per the guidelines issued by the NCISM, NCH and Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R.
Medical University.
25
CHECK LIST FOR ASH ADMISSION 2025-2026 SESSION
CERTIFICATES/ DOCUMENTS
DOCUMENTS OF CANDIDATE’S ARE AS FOLLOWS:
NEET-2025 Admit Card ✓
NEET-2025 Score Card ✓
X-Mark Sheet ✓
XI-Mark sheet ✓
XII –Mark Sheet ✓
Transfer Certificate ✓
Nativity Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil Nadu ✓
Community Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil
✓
Nadu (except- OC)
Certificate for Proof of Study from VI Std. to XII Std. in Tamil
✓
Nadu (From the Head of schools where studied)
Birth Certificate ✓
Eligibility Certificate obtained from the Tamil Nadu
Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Guindy, Chennai for the
✓
candidates of other Universities / Boards
(except TN State Board, CBSE and ISCE Board)
Candidate’s Aadhar card ✓
Parent Community Certificate from Competent Authority of
✓
Tamil Nadu(except- OC)
Income Certificate of parent for the candidates claiming fee
✓
exemption
26
ROUND FREE RESIGNATION EXIT WITH Eligibility FOR DISCONTINUATION FEES AFTER JOINING
EXIT FORFEITURE OF FURTHER
FEES COUNSELLING
Round 1 Allowed Allowed Allowed to Eligible for NIL
exit further
counselling
Round 2 Allowed Allowed only Allowed to Eligible for If the candidates
exit within further resign before the
once within
stipulated counselling stipulated date in
stipulated time
time without Round 2 the
forfeiture candidates will be
allowed free exit.
After the stipulated
date in round 2,
discontinuation fees
will be Rs.1 lakh and
forfeit Advance
tuition fees and
tuition fees.
Round 3 Not Not allowed If not joined, Not allowed in After joining the
allowed forfeit Advance next round allotted seat of
tuition fees and round 3,
Tuition fee. discontinuation
fees will be Rs.1
lakh and forfeiture
of Advance tuition
fees and tuition fees
will also apply.
Round 4 Not Not allowed If not joined Not eligible for After joining the
(Stray allowed forfeit next one year. allotted seat of
round) Advance Stray round,
tuition fees & discontinuation fees
Tuition fee will be Rs.1 lakh and
and not forfeiture of
eligible for Advance tuition fees
next one year and tuition fees will
also apply.
27
ROUND CANDIDATE FORFEITURE OF FEES ELIGIBILITY
If allotted and Can participate in round 2
No forfeiture of fees
joined for re- allotment
If allotted and not Can participate in subsequent
No forfeiture of fees
joined/Resigned rounds of counseling
Round 1
Can participate in subsequent
If not allotted
rounds of counseling
If not choice Can participate in subsequent
locked rounds of counseling
No forfeiture of fees. Allowed to
If allotted and Allowed for further rounds of
vacate seat once before the
counseling
joined
stipulated date.
If allotted /
Allowed for further rounds of
Re-allotted and No forfeiture of fees
counseling
not joined
Round 2
If not choice
No forfeiture of fees Eligible for round 3
locked
If wants to Forfeiture of advance tuition fee and Not eligible for round 3
discontinue after pay discontinuation fee
the stipulated
date and time
If not allotted Eligible for round 3
Not allowed to vacate seat.
If allotted and Not allowed for further
If wants to discontinue, then
Joined rounds of counseling
forfeit Advance tuition fees and pay
Discontinuation fee
Round 3
If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for stray round
Not joined
If not allotted Eligible for stray vacancy
If not choice
Eligible for stray vacancy
locked
Not allowed to vacate seat.
If wants to discontinue, then
If allotted and
Stray forfeit Advance tuition fees and pay
Joined
Not eligible for next one year.
vacanc Discontinuation fee
y
If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for next one year.
Not joined
28
Annexure - I
LIST OF SELF-FINANCING INDIAN MEDICINCE & HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGES
Arrival of All India Quota Seats out of the sanctioned strength of a Self- Financing Indian
Medicine & Homoeopathy Medical college is Fifteen percent of the Sanctioned strength.
Tentative Number of Seats
Name of the Annual in All India
Sl.o Name of the Institution
Course take Quota Seats
SIDDHA
1.
SRI SAI RAM SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE &
RESEARCH CENTRE, SAILEO NAGAR, WEST
TAMBARAM, CHENNAI-44 BSMS 50
8
TEL:044-22512050
Email:principal.sid@saimedical.com
2. VELU MAILU SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE
AND HOSPITAL, 48, GRAND WEST TRUNK
ROAD, BANGALORE HIGH ROAD,
BSMS 40 6
SRIPERUMBUDUR, KANCHEEPURAM-602105
TEL:04427162722,
Email:velumailusiddha@yahoo.co.in
3. AKILA THIRUVITHANCORE SIDDHA VAIDYA
SANGAM, MUNCHIRAI, PUDUKKADAI(POST),
K.K. DISTRICT-629171.PHONE:04651-235355 BSMS 60 9
Email:atsvssmc@gmail.com
4. R.V.S SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE,
KANNAMPALAYAM, COIMBATORE-641402
BSMS 30 5
PHONE;0422-2681123,2681124
Email:rvs_siddha@yahoo.co.in
5. SIVARAJ SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE,
SIDDHAR KOIL ROAD, THUMBATHULIPATTY,
PERUMAMPATTYPOSTSALEM-636307.
BSMS 50 8
PHONE:0427-2481006,2481007
Email:sivarajcolleges@yahoo.com
29
6. MARIASIDDHAMEDICALCOLLEGEANDHOSPIT
AL, THOTTAVARAM, MOOVATUMUGHAM
POST, THIRUVATTAR, KANYAKUMARI
BSMS 100 15
DISTRICT-629177. Phone:04651-
282578,282579
Email:mariasiddhacollege@gmail.com
7. JSA MEDICAL COLLEGE FOR SIDDHA AND
RESEARCH CENTRE, 38, TRICHY-CHENNAI
BSMS 60 9
HIGH WAY, NH45, PALI, ULUNDURPET,
KALLAKURICHI – 606104
8. NANDHA SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE &
HOSPITAL, ERODE-PERUNDURAI MAIN
ROAD,
BSMS 60 9
PITCHANDAMPALAYAM
ERODE – 638052
www.nandhasiddha.org PH: 04294-222006
9. EXCEL SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE AND
RESEARCH CENTRE, PALLAKKAPALAYAM(PO),
BSMS 60 9
KOMARAPALAYAM, NAMAKKAL – 637303
10. SIR ISSAAC NEWTON SIDDHA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
APPAKOVIL, ANTHANAPETTAI-POST,
BSMS 60 9
NAGAPATTINAM-611 102
CELL: 8248692698, 9842450111
Email: principalsinsiddha@gmail.com
11.
ANNAI SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE
ANAIKUDI ROAD, KOVILACHERI, 15
BSMS 100
KUMBAKONAM,TANJAVUR–612503.
Email:annaisiddha@gmail.com
12. ‘SHRI INDRA GANESAN INSTITUTE OF
MEDICAL SCIENCE MEDICAL COLLEGE,
MANIKANDAM, TRICHY-620 012.
BSMS 100 15
PHONE: 8508688841, 7373333444.
Email : indraganesantrust@gmail.com,
director@indraganesaninstitutions.com
13 SUDHA SUSEENDRAN SIDDHA MEDICAL
COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL, PARAKUNNU
BSMS 50 7
ROAD, VANNIYOOR, KALIYAKKAVILAI, K.K.
DIST- 629153, TAMIL NADU. Phone: 04651-
244674
30
AYURVEDA
1. AYURVEDA COLLEGE, COI MBATORE, 242-B
TRICHYROAD, SULUR, COIMBATORE-641042.
BAMS 40 6
PHONE:0422-2681346,2681347
Email:ayurvedacollege@yahoo.com
2. SRI SAIRAM AYURVEDA M EDICAL COLLEGE &
RESEARCH CENTRE, SAILEO NAGAR,
WESTTAMBARAM, CHENNAI-44 PHONE:044- BAMS 50 8
22512040
Email:principal.ayur@saimedical.com
3. MARIA AYURVEDA MEDIC AL COLLEGE,
THOTTAVARAM, ATTOOR, THIRUVATTAR, PO,
BAMS 60 9
NEARMARTHANDAM, K.K.DIST-629177,
Email:mariaayurvedacollege@gmail.com
4. NANDHA AYURVEDA MED ICAL COLLEGE &
HOSPITAL, ERODE-PERUNDURAI MAIN
ROAD, PITCHANDAMPALAYAM BAMS 60 9
ERODE – 638052
PH: 04294-222006
5. IMMANUEL ARASAR AYU RVEDA COLLEGE &
HOSPITAL, NATTALAM, MARTHANDAM
BAMS 60 9
KANYAKUMARI. PHONE: 9443606955
HOMOEOPATHY
1. WHITE MEMORIAL HOMO EOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE, ATTOOR, K.K.DISTRICT PIN:629177,
PHONE:04651-282282 BHMS 100 15
Email: wmhmc062@gmail.com
2. VENKATESWARA HOMOE OPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
NO4/11, SAMAYAPURAM MAINROAD,
BHMS 100 15
KARAMBAKKAM, PORUR, CHENNAI –600116
PHONE:044-24760638,24763676
Email:vhmc2000@yahoo.com
31
3. Dr. HAHNEMANN HOMO EOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE, KONERIPATTI,
RASIPURAM TALUK,
BHMS 100 15
NAMAKKAL DISTRICT-637408.
PHONE:04287-226451
Email: drhmcrc@gmail.com
4. SARADA KRISHNA HOMO EOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE, CONVENT JUNCTION,
KULASEKARAM,
K.K. DISTRICT - 629161 BHMS 100 15
PHONE:04651-279448, 280100
Email:college@skhmc.org
5. MARTIN HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGE
& HOSPITAL, DPF MILL COMPOUND,
G.N.MILLS (POST), METTUPALAYAMROAD,
BHMS 50 8
COIMBATORE-641029.PHONE:0422-
2647657, Email:homoeocollege@gmail.com
6. SRI SAI RAM HOMOE OPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE & RESEARCH CENTRE, SAILEO
NAGAR, WESTTAMBARAM, CHENNAI-600044 50 8
BHMS
PHONE:044-32507774/22512030
Email:Principal.hom@saimedical.com
7. SIVARAJ HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGE
AND RESEARCH IINSTITUTE,
SIDDHARKOIL ROAD, THUMBATHULIPATTY,
PERUMAMPATTY(Post), BHMS 50 8
SALEM - 636307
PHONE:0427-481006
Email:sivarajcolleges@yahoo.com
8. R.V.S. HOMOEOPATHY M EDICALCOLLEGE,
242- BTRICHY ROAD, SULUR, COIMBATORE-
641402 BHMS 50 8
PHONE:0422-2680077
Email:rvs.homoeo@yahoo.com
9. MARIA HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICALCOLLEGE,
PERAI, ATTOOR, THIRUVATTAR PO,
NEARMARTHANDAM, K.K.DIST - 629177, BHMS 60 9
Email:mariahomoeocollege@gmail.com
32
10. EXCEL HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGE
AND RESEARCH CENTRE,
BHMS 100 15
PALLAKKAPALAYAM(PO), KOMARAPALAYAM,
NAMAKKAL – 637303
11. SHRI BHARANI HOME OPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL
PILIKKAL MEDU, KOKKARAYANPETTAI ROAD,
KOKKARAYANPETTAI
BHMS 100 15
TIRUCHENGODE – 638007
PHONE: 04207 – 227226, 226478,
9443326082
NOTE:
Seat allotment will be made to the above colleges under All India Quota subject to the
approval of Government of India, N.C.I.S.M/N.C.H. New Delhi and affiliation of The Tamil
Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University.
33
Annexure - II
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE FOR ADMINISTRATION OF HEPATITIS-B VACCINATION
I, Dr………………………………..Registration No……………….certify that I have
this day……………..of…………..2025 administered the Hepatitis-B Vaccine to the candidate
whose particulars are given below:
1. Name of the Candidate
2. Father’s Name
3. Sex
4. Age
5 Identification marks:
.
I.
II.
6 DOSE I/II/III
.
Signature of the Applicant Signature
of Medical Officer
Name and Designation
Officer Seal
Place:
Date:
34
Annexure – III
AGREEMENT BOND FORM FOR CANDIDATES ADMITTED FOR B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S. / B.H.M.S.
COURSES
FOR 2025-2026 ACADEMIC YEAR
This agreement made this ..................... day of ……………………. month of 2025 between with
Governor of Tamil Nadu (hereinafter called the Governor with expression shall, where the context
so admits include his successor in office) of one part and .................................... son/daughter of
.......................................... resident of ………………. in the ....................................... Taluk
of………………………………….. District (hereinafter called the candidates) which expression shall, where
the context so admits include his/her heirs, executors, administrators and representatives of the
other part.
WHEREAS the candidate has, on his/her application been selected to undergo training for the
B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S. / B.H.M.S. course in the Self Financing Medical College under Management
Quota Seat (hereinafter referred to as the said college).
AND WHEREAS the candidate has agreed to complete his / her training for the said course, at the
said college subject to the conditions hereinafter appearing.
Now THEREFORE, this agreement witnesses and it is hereby agreed as follows:
1. The Candidate shall diligently complete his/her training for the said course at the said college,
shall abide by the rules of the said colleges for the time being in force regulating the conduct of
students at the said college and shall pass all the examinations prescribed for the said course by
the University or the Medical Institution concerned.
2. Upon passing the final B.S.M.S./ B.A.M.S./ B.H.M.S. Examination the candidate shall serve as
“Intern” for the prescribed period as laid down by Indian Medicine Central Council Act (Central
Act of 1979).
3. (i) The candidate shall on demand made by the Government within two years from the date on
which he/she registers himself/herself as a Medical Practitioner, serve for a period of not less
than five years and in such rural areas as the Government may by general or special orders
specify.
(ii) Those candidates who fail to comply with clause 3 (i) shall have to pay a sum of Rs 3,00,000/-
(Rupees Three Lakhs only) or as the Government may direct as penalty for having breach the
contract in the bond.
35
4. During the period of Internship under clause (2) and while in service under clause (3) the
candidate shall faithfully, diligently and with skill and ability perform his/her duties and observe
the rules for the time being inforce made by the Governor or the President as the case may be
for regulating the conduct of Government Servants.
5. While in service under clause (3) the Pay and allowance and other conditions of service of the
candidate shall be regulated by the rules and orders of the Government for the time being
inforce, for the posts to which he/she is appointed.
6. Candidates who discontinue the course on or after the last cut off date for admission process for
the academic session 2025-2026 and on any date of the subsequent years are bound by the
bond and thereby they shall have to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only) as
penalty for having breached the contract in the bond by means of Demand Draft in favour of
“The Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai-106” payable at Chennai.
7. Any sum falling due from the candidate under this agreement shall be recovered from him/her
as an arrear of land revenue.
8. If any dispute shall arise between the parties hereto in respect of this agreement or any of the
provisions herein contained or anything arising hereunto except in respect of matters on which
the decisions of the Government under clause (6) is declared to be final and binding, the same
shall be referred to the arbitration of Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy whose
decision thereon shall be final and binding on the parties.
9. The witness shall bear the stamp duty payable in respect of this agreement if required. In
witness whereof the parties here to have appended their signature hereunto on the dates
respectively mentioned against the signature.
Signature of the Candidate and Date
Witnesses: Signature of the Parent/Guardian and full address
1.
2.
Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
for and on behalf of the Governor.
36
To
The Governor of Tamil Nadu
Whereas the Governor has, in order to secure due performance of the above agreement,
demanded security from the candidates.
Now, therefore, in consideration of the admission of the candidate to the said college and his/her
continuance there, for training as aforesaid and at the request of the candidate.
(i)..................................................... Son /Daughter of............................................
...................................................... Resident of.......................................................
…………………………………………………..Taluk of .........................................................
in the District of .............................................
ii)..................................................... Son /Daughter of............................................
...................................................... Resident of.......................................................
…………………………………………………..Taluk of .........................................................
in the District of .............................................
iii)..................................................... Son /Daughter of............................................
...................................................... Resident of.......................................................
…………………………………………………..Taluk of .........................................................
in the District of .............................................
hereinafter called ‘The Sureties’ on behalf of the candidate do hereby jointly and severally agree
that in the event of the candidate committing any breach of any term of the above agreement to
which breach the decision of the Government shall be final and binding on the sureties we shall
pay to the Government on demand and without the demur sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One
lakh only) or as the Government may direct and we hereby bind ourselves and representatives
for such payment. We further agree that any sum due hereunder shall be recovered as an arrear
of land revenue.
37
We also agree that notwithstanding the provisions of sections 133 and 135 of the Indian
Contract Act, 1872 (Central Act IX of 1872) or any other rule of law or equity in that behalf any
indulgence of for bearance shown by the Government to the candidate or any variance in the
terms of the contract with the candidate whether with or without the consent of the sureties or
either of this shall not operate as a discharge of the sureties obligation under this bond.
Signed by us this .......................................... day of .......................... 2025-2026.
Witness:
1.
2.
1. Signature of First Surety / Parent or
Guardian of Candidate Full address
.................................................................
.............................................................
.............................................................
2. Signature of Second Surety and Full Address
.................................................................
.................................................................
..............................................................
a. Signature of Third Surety and Full Address
.................................................................
..............................................................
…………………………………………………………….
38
Annexure- IV
Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent/Guardian
(This should not be enclosed with the application but should be submitted only at the time of
admission)
I/WE do hereby solemnly and sincerely affirm
1. That the statements made and information furnished in the application submitted and
also in all the enclosures thereto submitted by him/her are true. Should it however
be found that any information furnished therein is untrue in material particulars, I/We
realize that he/she is liable for criminal prosecution and forfeiture of his / her seat in
the Institution allotted during the counselling.
2. That my son/daughter/ward would conform strictly to all the rules and regulations
prescribed by the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai in force now or
which may be introduced in the Institution hereafter and that I/We realize that breach
of discipline and rules on my son’s/daughter’s/ ward’s part would entail forfeiture of
his/her seat in the Institution.
3. That my son/daughter/ward shall not make any claim for admission to a particular
college as a matter of right during allotment/Re-allotment.
4. That my son/daughter/ward agrees to pay any amount that may be become due as
and when the fee structure is revised as may be decided by Government of Tamil
Nadu /Committee appointed by the Government for the purpose.
5. That my son/daughter/ward do hereby agree to conform to follow the rules and
regulations including those relating to the hostel laid down or to be laid down by the
Dean of the Institution for due maintenance of discipline at the said college and
assure that he/she will not join any agitation /strike of any kind during course of study
and further agree to make good when called upon to do so to the Government of
Tamil Nadu any damage to furniture, apparatus or other articles which may be caused
by any carelessness negligence and want only on his/her part.
6. That my son/daughter/ward who is a Native of Tamil Nadu and will not claim dual
Nativity in future.
7. That my son/daughter/ward hereby declare that he/she belongs to …………….
Community (Sub caste ………………….. ) and is fully aware the producing a false
39
Community certificate leads to expulsion from any course of study at any time besides
initiation of criminal action against him/her as per law.
8. That we are fully aware, as per the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
and Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Ragging Act,1997, Ragging is an offence, and is banned
in the Institution and anyone indulging in ragging is liable to be punished by expulsion
from the Institution and /or rigorous imprisonment up to 3 years, and /or fine up to
Rs.25,000/-
Signature of Candidate Signature of the
Parent/Guardian.
Place:
Date:
40
Annexure - V
INCOME CERTIFICATE
(This Certificate should be issued by an Officer of Revenue Department not below
the rank of Tahsildar in the Taluk concerned.)
Name of the Applicant …………………………………... Application No
………………………..
This is to certify that Annual income of Thiru/Thirumathi ………………………………………
(Parent Name) Parent/Guardian* of Thiru/Selvi/Thirumathi
……………………………………………... (Applicant Name) an applicant for admission to
BSMS/BAMS /BHMS course in Government / Self-financing Colleges in TamilNadu
residing at
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………… is Rs. ……………... (Rupees
……………………………………………………………………………………… only)
Signature:
Name and Designation:
Office Seal:
Date :
Station:
Note: *Applicable only when both parents are deceased
1. This Certificate should not be issued by Special Tahsildars. Deputy Tahsildars such as
Loans, Land acquisition. Election, Excise and HQs. Deputy Tahsildars, Special Deputy
Collectors, Asst. Commissioner of Agricultural income, Excise and Elections etc.,
2. Candidates of SC/SCA/ST whose parents’ annual income is less than Rs.2.5 lakhs and
claiming the fee concession for admission to Government Medical Colleges and
Government Quota in Self Financing Medical Colleges should produce the above valid
Income Certificate (As per G.O.(Ms) No.51 AD and TW Department, dated 07-08-
2013 in Original at the time of Counselling Compulsorily.
41
Annexure – VI
FAQ’S REGARDING COUNSELLING PROCESS
Q.No.1: How to apply for ASH UG Medical Degree Courses admission in Tamil Nadu?
Ans: After the NEET-UG 2025 results are out, there will be notification in the websites
www.tnayushselection.org, www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in for application to ASH UG Medical
Degree Courses admission in Tamil Nadu. Candidates are advised to Register them to
create User Name and Password after that login using their User Name and Password.
Candidates are advised to read this prospectus carefully and apply through the website in
Online mode only.
Note: Cost of applying online: Rs.1000/- (SC/SCA/ST candidates are exempted)
Q.No. 2: I have applied online. Is this enough for getting a seat?
Ans: No. Applying online is just the first stage in the entire process. Once all the applications are
received and scrutinized Eligible Merit List of Candidates (Candidates who have applied and
are found eligible) will be published in the websites. After this Candidates have to register
for the counselling process as mentioned in the scheme of counselling.
Q. No. 3: How do I register for the counselling?
Ans.: After the Merit List is published candidates have to register before the onset of counselling
by paying the non-refundable online Processing Fee of Rs 1000/- in the website after
logging in using the same credentials (User Name, Password) used during the application
process. Registration is allowed before Round 1, Round 3 and Stray Round and Fresh
registration is not allowed before Round 2 (as this is a re-allotment Round)
Note: Counselling Registration is allowed only for already applied candidates who are in
the Eligible Merit list and not for those candidates who have not at all applied to ASH UG
Medical Degree Course.
Q. No. 4: How and when I had to make the payment?
Ans: After completion of Choice filling, payment page appears automatically. Candidate can do
online payment by Net Banking / Credit card/ Debit card. Only after the successful
payment, candidate can submit their choice filling.
42
Q. No. 5: Is there any restriction for filling up number of choices of Institution (College) in choice
filling form?
Ans: No, you can give as many choices as you wish during online choice filling. However, choices
should be in order of your preference. The choices will be available based on your eligibility
and application.
Q. No.6: Is it necessary to fill up the choices and lock the choices to get seat allotted? Or I will be
allotted seat automatically from leftover seats?
Ans: After online registration (registration is compulsory to take part in online allotment
process, before the counselling Rounds during specified registration period), you have to
fill in choice of Institution/college/course in order of your preference. Once choice is filled
in, it can be modified before locking it. If candidate does not lock the choice submitted by
him/her, the choices already filled will be automatically locked as per counselling schedule.
Note: If the candidate does not fill choices for any college, will not be allotted any seat
during the counselling
IMPORTANT:
Don’t wait till the last minute to Register and Lock your choices. Please go through your
submitted choices before locking, as once you lock the choices they cannot be modified or
changed even if you have made a mistake. It may result in allotment of a seat which you
never wanted. (Please note that the choices once locked cannot be unlocked even by the
Selection Committee)
Q. No. 7: Is it necessary to join allotted College of Round 1 to get chance to participate in Round 2?
Ans: No, candidates need not report or join the allotted college of Round 1 since there is free
exit.
However, if they want to retain the Round 1 seat and upgrade in Round 2 they have to
physically join the college of Round 1 and participate in Round 2 online.
Q. No. 8: Can a candidate participate in Round 2 without submitting fresh choices (based on
choices submitted before Round-1)?
Ans: Fresh choice submission by eligible candidates, as mentioned above is necessary for
consideration for seat allotment during any Round. If candidate does not submit fresh
choice(s) during choice filling period, the candidate will not be considered for allotment of
seat during Round- 2 and will retain the already joined seat, if any
43
Q. No.9: If I opt to participate in Round 2 of counselling whether my allotted seat
(of Round 1) will be cancelled?
Ans: In case you are not allotted any seat in the Round 2, you will retain earlier allotted seat in
Round 1 if you had joined already. However, on re-allotment of a seat in Round 2, the
earlier allotted seat in Round 1 will automatically be cancelled and allotted to another
candidate. Therefore, you are advised to fill in only choices which you prefer over the
earlier allotted seat, for Round 2.
Q. No. 10: - What is the procedure for Round 3 Counselling which will be conducted by
Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee for ASH Medical Degree Courses?
Ans. Since reallotment is allowed in Round-3, The net vacant seats due to Not allotted / non
joining, non-reporting of Round 2 and any converted seats due to lack of candidates in the
particular quota and the virtual vacancies will be published in the seat matrix and eligible
candidates have to submit fresh choices and the result will be processed as per Choice &
Merit applying the rule of Reservation.
Q. No. 11: How much time will I be given to join the allotted college?
Ans: Candidates allotted seats will be required to join the allotted college/course within the
stipulated time which is mentioned in counselling schedule. However, candidates are
advised to join as early as possible and not to wait for last day of joining, due to different
schedule of holiday (including local holidays) / working hours in various ISM Medical
Colleges. Therefore, candidates are advised to contact allotted college immediately after
declaration of result of counselling allotment process, to know the details. If candidate fails
to join the allotted College within stipulated time, then the allotted seat will be cancelled.
For Round 3 and Stray Round as there is very little time for the entire counselling process
and there is no process of reallotment/resignation, downloading of allotment order after
payment of Tuition Fees will be considered as Joined. But the candidate has to report to
the allotted college within the stipulated time. If the candidate does not report, candidates
will be treated as Discontinued and his seat will be considered vacant and candidates will
forfeit the advance Tuition Fees.
Please note that under no circumstances date of joining/date of reporting can be extended
by the Selection Committee.
44
Q. No. 12: What documents are required at the time of Joining/ Reporting to allotted College?
Ans: The following original documents (along with attested photocopies) are required at the
time of joining/reporting to the allotted college:
i. Class X Mark Sheet
ii. Class XI Mark Sheet
iii. H.S.C. Mark sheet or any other equivalent examination.
iv. Transfer certificate obtained after the completion of H.S.C / equivalent examination or
any other courses.
v. Certificate for proof of study from VI Std. to XII Std for the candidates who have
studied completely in Tamil Nadu.
vi. Community Certificate
vii. Nativity certificate.
viii. Eligibility Certificate (if applicable)
ix. Migration certificate (if applicable)
Q. No. 13: In case candidate had to apply for Govt. Quota, All India Quota and management quota
in SF Colleges, should the candidate pay the fee for all?
Ans. Yes. As per the policy, the candidate has to pay the fees for all Quota if he applies. In this
case the candidate will have to pay fee for GQ in SF Colleges. Rs.10,000/- plus for each
A.I.Q, MQ Rs.25,000/- as Advance Tuition Fee in addition to the Online Processing Fee
Rs.500/- for GQ and Rs.1000/- for A.I.Q and MQ.
Q. No.14: Will the Selection Committee bear the bank charges incurred by the candidate while
registering for counselling?
Ans: No. Bank Charges if any, incurred by the candidate should be borne by the candidate only.
Q. No.15: Will the Selection Committee pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition Fee?
Ans: No. The Selection Committee will not pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition Fee.
Q. No. 16: If I forget my password that I have created during the process of registration, how to
retrieve it?
Ans: To retrieve the forgotten password, system facilitates the following process:
45
The candidate is required to enter the information that candidates filled at the time of
registration and then security question & answer thereon to be entered as given during
New Candidate registration process. The above data submitted by candidate will be
validated with the registered candidate’s database. If the above entries match, then only
the candidate would be permitted to enter new password to proceed further.
IMPORTANT:
Please keep the information same as that you have furnished on the application form
confidential, and do not share the password and OTP with anybody as to register for online
allotment process and submit choice you need that information. If somebody else uses
that information, candidates can misuse your online registration and prevent you from
taking part in online allotment process. Keep print out of application form ready for
reference with you.
46
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURES Name
Annexure - I List of Self-financing Medical Colleges
Annexure - II Medical Certificate for Administration of Hepatitis – B
Vaccination
Annexure - III Agreement bond
Annexure – IV Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent / Guardian
Annexure - V Income Certificate
Annexure - VI Faq’s regarding counselling process
47
LIST OF COMMUNITIES
2025-2026
LIST SHOWING THE SCHEDULED
CASTES,
SCHEDULED TRIBES, BACKWARD
CLASSES, BACKWARD CLASS-
MUSLIMS,
MOST BACKWARD CLASSES
AND DENOTIFIED
COMMUNITIES IN THE
STATE OF TAMILNADU
LIST OF COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE OF TAMILNADU
LISTOF BACKWARD CLASSES, MOST BACKWARD CLASSES,
DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES THROUGH OUT THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU
UNLESS AND OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
1. G.O.Ms.No.85 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities
welfare Department dated 29.7.2008
2. G.O.Ms.No.96, Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities
welfare Department dated 8.9.2008
3. G.O.Ms.No.97 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities
welfare Department dated 11.9.2008
4. G.O.Ms.No.37 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities
welfare Department dated 21.5.2009
5. G.O.Ms.No.98 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities
welfare Department dated 5.1.2009.
48
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASSES
Sl.No Name of the Caste
1. Agamudayar including Thozhu or Thuluva Vellala
2. AgaramVellan Chettiar
3. Alwar, Azhavar and Alavar(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District.)
4. Servai (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Pudukottai Districts.)
5. Nulayar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
6. Archakarai Vellala
7. Aryavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
8. Ayira Vaisyar
9. Badagar
10. Billava
11. Bondil
12. Boyas (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem,
Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts).
PeddaBoyar (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts) Oddars
(except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai,Theni and Dindigul Districts)
Kaloddars (except Kancheepuram, Chegalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukkottai, Tiruchirappalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur,
Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
Nellorepet oddars (except Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts) Sooramari
oddars (except Salem and Namakkal Districts)
13 Chakkala (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts)
14. Chavalakarar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
15. Chettuor Chetty (including Kottar Chetty, ElurChetty, Pathira Chetty, Valayal Chetty, Pudukadai
Chetty)(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
16. Chowdry
16(A) Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Castes irrespective of the generation of conversion (except
the Paravar conversion to Christianity of Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District) for the purpose of reservation of seats in Educational Institutions and for seats in Public
Services.
16(B). C.S.I formerly S.I.U.C (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
17. Donga Dasaris (except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
49
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts.
18. Devangar,Sedar
19. Dombs (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
Dommars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Thiruvannamalai Districts)
20. Enadi
21. Ezhavathy (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
22. Ezhuthachar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
23. Ezhuva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
24. Gangavar
25. Gavara, Gavarai and Vadugar (Vaduvar) (other than Kamma, Kapu, Balija and Reddi)
26. Gounder
27. Gowda (including Gammala, Kalali and Anuppa Gounder)
28. Hegde
29. Idiga
30. Illathu Pillaimar, Illuvar, Ezhuvar and Illathar
31. Jhetty
32. Jogis (Except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Cuddalore,
Villupuram, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
33. Kabbera
34 Kaikolar, Sengunthar
35. Kaladi(exceptSivaganga,Virudhunagar,Ramanathapuram,Madurai,Theni,
Dindigul,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
36. Kalari Kurup including Kalari Panicker (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tenkasi District)
37. Kalingi
38. Kallar, Easanattu Kallar , Gandharva Kottai Kallars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Tiruvarur,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts).
Kootappal Kallars (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
Piramalai Kallars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur Districts) Periyasooriyur
Kallars (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
39. Kallar Kula Thondaman
40. Kalveli Gounder
41. Kambar
50
42. Kammalar or Viswakarma, Viswakarmala (including Thattar, Porkollar, Kannar, Karumar, Kollar,
Thacher, Kal Thacher, Kamsala and Viswa brahmin.)
43. Kani, Kanisu, Kaniyar Panicker
44. Kaniyala Vellalar
45. Kannada Saineegar, Kannadiyar (Throughout the State) and Dasapalanjika (Coimbatore, Erode,
Tiruppur and the Nilgiris Districts)
46. Kannadiya Naidu
47. Karpoora Chettiar
48. Karuneegar (Seer Karuneegar, Sri Karuneegar, Sarattu Karuneegar, Kaikatti Karuneegar,
Mathuvazhi Kanakkar, Sozhi Kanakkar and Sunnambu Karuneegar)
49. Kasukkara Chettiar
50. Katesar, Pattamkatti
51. Kavuthiyar
52. Kerala Mudali
53. Kharvi
54. Khatri
55. Kongu Vaishnava
56. Kongu Vellalars( including Vellala Gounder, Nattu Gounder, Narambukkatti Gounder, Tirumudi
Vellalar, Thondu Vellalar, Pala Gounder, Poosari Gounder, Anuppa Vellala Gounder, Padaithalai
Gounder, Chendalai Gounder, Pavalankatti Vellala Gounder, Palavellala Gounder, Sanku Vellala
Gounder and Rathinagiri Gounder).
57. Koppala Velama
58. Koteyar
59. Krishnavaka (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
60. Kudikara Vellalar
61. Kudumbi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
62. Kuga Vellalar
63. Kunchidigar
63(A) Latin Catholics except Latin Catholic Vannar in Kanniyakumari District.
63(B) Lathin Catholics in Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
64. Lambadi
65. Lingayat (Jangama)
66. Mahratta (Non-Brahmin)(including Namdev Mahratta)
67. Malayar
68. Male
51
69. Maniagar
70. Maravars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinum , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
71. Moondrumandai Enbathunalu (84) Ur.Sozhia Vellalar
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli and Toothukudi Districts) Karumaravars,
72. AMpopoapnpaadn Kondayam kottai Maravar (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram,
73. MMaudthuurarai,j aT,h Menuit ahnirdiy Darin, dMiguutlt iDriiysatrri,c Mts.u)t haraiyar
74. SNeamdabra, nSahda nMaar raanvda rGs r(aemxcaenpi ti nScivluadgainngg aC,h Vriisrtuiadnh uNnaadgaarr,, Cahnrdis Rtiaamn aSnhaatnhaarp aunrda mCh Driissttiraicnt sG) ramani.
75. Nagaram
76. Naikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
77. Nangudi Vellalar
78. Nanjil Mudali (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
79. Odar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
80. Odiya
81. Oottruvalanattu Vellalar
82. O.P.S.Vellalar
83. Ovachar
84. Paiyur Kotta Vellalar
85. Pamulu
86. Panar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the community
is a Scheduled Caste)
86A Pandiya Vellalar
87 -Omitted-
88. Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District
89. Pannirandam Chettiar or Uthama Chettiar
90. Parkavakulam (including Surithimar, Nathamar, Malayamar, Moopanar and Nainar)
91. Perike (including Perike Balija)
92. Perumkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
93. Podikara Vellalar
94. Pooluva Gounder
95. Poraya
96. Pulavar (in Coimbatore and Tiruppur Districts)
97. Pulluvar or Pooluvar
98. Pusala
99. Reddy (Ganjam)
100. Sadhu Chetty (including Telugu Chetty, Twenty four Manai Telungu Chetty)
101. Sakkaravar or Kavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District )
52
102. Salivagana
103. Saliyar, Padmasaliyar, Pattusaliyar, Pattariyar and Adhaviyar
104. Savalakkarar
105. Senaithalaivar, Senaikudiyar and Illaivaniar
105A Serakula Vellalar
106. Sourashtra (Patnulkarar)
107. Sozhiavellalar (including Sozha Vellalar, Vetrilaikarar, Kodikalkarar and Keeraikarar)
108. Srisayar
109. Sundaram Chetty
109A Thiyya
110. Thogatta Veerakshatriya
111. Tholkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
112. Tholuva Naicker and Vetalakara Naicker
113 -Omitted-
114. Thoriyar
115. Ukkirakula Kshatriya Naicker
116. Uppara, Uppillia and Sagara
117. Urali Gounder ( except Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai District) and
Orudaya Gounder or Oorudaya Gounder (in Madurai ,Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode,
Tiruppur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Salem and Namakkal Districts
)
118. Urikkara Nayakkar
118A Virakodi Vellala
119 Vallambar
119.A Vallanattu Chettiar
120. Valmiki
121. Vaniyar, Vania Chettiar (including Gandla, Ganika, Telikula and Chekkalar)
122. Veduvar and Vedar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where
the community is a Scheduled Caste)
123. Veerasaiva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
124. Velar
125. Vellan Chettiar
126. Veluthodathu Nair (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
Vokkaligar (including Vakkaligar, Okkaligar, Kappiliyar, Kappiliya, Okkaliga Gowda, Okkaliya- Gowder,
127.
Okkaliya Gowda )
53
128. Wynad Chetty (The Nilgiris District)
Yadhava (including Idaiyar, Telugu Speaking Idaiyar known as Vaduga Ayar or Vaduga Idaiyar or Golla
129.
and Asthanthra Golla)
130. Yavana
131. Yerukula
Converts to Christianity from any Hindu Backward Classes Community or Most Backward Classes
Community or Denotified Communities (except the Converts to Christianity from Meenavar,
131A
Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar, Mukkuvar or Mukayar and Paravar)
Orphans and destitute children who have lost their parents before reaching the age of ten and are
destitutes; and who have nobody else to take care of them either by law or custom; and also who are
132. admitted into any of the schools or orphanages run by the Government or recognized by the
Government.
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASS MUSLIMS
1. Ansar
2. Dekkani Muslims
3. Dudekula
4. Labbais including Rowthar and Marakayar (whether their spoken language is Tamil or Urdu)
5. Mapilla
6. Sheik
7. Syed
LIST OF MOST BACKWARDS CLASSES COMMUNITIES
1 Ambalakarar
2 Andipandaram
2(A) Arayar (in Kanniyakumari District)
3 Bestha, Siviar
4 Bhatraju (other than Kshatriya Raju)
5 Boyar, Oddar
6 Dasari
7 Dommara
8 Eravallar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
community is a Scheduled Tribe )
54
9 Isaivellalar
10 Jambuvanodai
11 Jangam
12 Jogi
13 Kongu Chettiar (in Coimbatore and Erode Districts only)
14 Koracha
15 Kulala (including Kuyavar and Kumbarar)
16 Kunnuvar Mannadi
17 Kurumba, Kurumba Gounder
18 Kuruhini Chetty
18(A) Latin Catholic Christian Vannar (in Kanniyakumari District)
19 Maruthuvar, Navithar, Mangala, Velakattalavar, Velakatalanair and Pronopakari
20 Mond Golla
21 Moundadan Chetty
22 Mahendra, Medara
23 Mutlakampatti
24 Narikoravar (Kurivikars)
25 Nokkar
25(A) Panisaivan/Panisivan
Vanniakula Kshatriya (including Vanniyar, Vanniya, Vannia Gounder, Gounder or Kander, Padayachi, Palli
26
and Agnikula Kshatriya)
27 Paravar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
Community is a Scheduled Caste)
27A Paravar converts to Christianity including the Paravar converts to Christianity of Kanniyakumari
District and Shencottah Taluk in Tenkasi District.
28 Meenavar (Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar) (including converts to Christianity )
29 Mukkuvar or Mukayar (including converts to Christianity)
30 Punnan Vettuva Gounder
31 Pannayar (other than Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District)
32 Sathatha Srivaishnava (including Sathani, Chattadi and Chattada Srivaishnava)
33 Sozhia Chetty
34 Telugupatty Chetty
35 Thottia Naicker ( including Rajakambalam, Gollavar, Sillavar, Thockalavar , Thozhuva Naicker and
Erragollar)
36 Thondaman
36(A) Thoraiyar (Nilgris)
55
36(B) Thoraiyar (Plains)
36(C) Transgender or Eunuch (Thirunangai or Aravani)
37 Valaiyar (including Chettinad Valayars)
38 Vannar (Salavai Thozhilalar)(including Agasa, Madivala, Ekali, Rajakula, Veluthadar and Rajaka) (except
in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the community is a
Scheduled Caste)
39 Vettaikarar
40 Vettuva Gounder
41 Yogeeswarar
LIST OF DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
1 Attur Kilnad Koravars (Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore, Villupuram, kallakurichi, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga and Virudhunagar Districts)
2 Attur Melnad Koravars (Salem and Namakkal District)
3 Appanad Kondayamkottai Maravar (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni and
Dindigul Districts )
4 Ambalakarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
5 Ambalakkarar (Suriyanur, Tiruchirapalli District)
6 Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem, Namakkal,
Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts)
7 Battu Turkas
8 C.K.Koravars (Cuddalore, Villupuram and Kallakurichi Districts)
9 Chakkala (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai,
Tiruvarur, Pudukottai Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and the
Nilgiris Districts)
10 Changyampudi Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
11 Chettinad Valayars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
12 Dombs (Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
13 Dobba Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
14 Dommars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur,
Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
15 Donga Boya
16 Donga Ur.Korachas
56
17 Devagudi Talayaris
18 Dobbai Korachas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts )
19 Dabi Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts )
20 Donga Dasaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur,
Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
21 Gorrela Dodda Boya
22 Gudu Dasaris
23 Gandarvakottai Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Cuddalore, Villupuram and
Kallakurichi Districts)
24 Gandarvakottai Kallars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai
Districts)
25 Inji Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
26 Jogis (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Chennai, Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
27 Jambavanodai
28 Kaladis (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur
Districts )
29 Kal Oddars (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar,
Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and Namakkal
Districts)
30 Koravars (Kancheepuram , Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar,
Pudukottai,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Thiravarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukadi, Chennai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The
Nilgiris Districts )
31 Kalinji Dabikoravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts)
32 Kootappal Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
33 Kala Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
34 Kalavathila Boyas
57
35 Kepmaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur Perambalur and
Ariyalur Districts )
36 Maravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi and Toothukudi
Districts)
37 Monda Koravars
38 Monda Golla (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
39 Mutlakampatti (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalaur and Pudukottai Districts)
40 Nokkars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
41 Nellorepet Oddars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
42 Oddars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts)
43 Pedda Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
44 Ponnai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
45 Piramalai Kallars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai,
Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur Districts)
46 Peria Suriyur Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalurand Pudukottai Districts)
47 Padayachi (Vellayan Kuppam in Cuddalore District and Tennore in Tiruchirapalli District )
48 Punnan Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts )
49 Servai (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
50 Salem Melnad Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur, Pudukottai,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Salem, Namakkal, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
Tiruvannamalai Districts)
51 Salem Uppu Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
52 Sakkaraithamadai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
53 Saranga Palli Koravars
54 Sooramari Oddars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
55 Sembanad Maravars (Sivaganga, Virudunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
56 Thalli Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
57 Telungapatti Chetis (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
58
58 Thottia Naickers (Sivaganga , Virudunagar, Ramanathapuram, Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu,
Tiruvallur, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem, Namakkal, Vellore, Tirupathur,
Ranipet, Tiruvannamalai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
59 Thogamalai Koravars or Kepmaris (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
60 Uppukoravars or Settipalli Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
61 Urali Gounders (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
62 Wayalpad or Nawalpeta Korachas
63 Vaduvarpatti Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudunagar,
Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
64 Valayars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur Pudukottai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
65 Vettaikarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts)
66 Vetta Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
67 Varaganeri Koravars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
68 Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED CASTES)
1 Adi Andhra
2 Adi Dravida
3 Adi Karnataka
4 Ajila
5 Aruthathiyar
6 Ayyanavar (in Kanyakumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
7 Baira
8 Bakuda
9 Bandi
10 Bellara
11 Bharata (In Kanykumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District.
59
12 Chakkiliyan
13 Chalavadi
14 Chamar, Muchi
15 Chandala
16 Cheruman
17 Devendrakula Velalar (Devendrakulanathan, Kadaiyan (excluding in the coastal areas of Tirunalveli,
thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Tiruvarur and Nagapattinam district),
Kalladi, Kudumban, Pallan, Pannadi, Vathiriyan)
18 Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano
19 Domban
20 Godagali
21 Godda
22 Gosangi
23 Holeya
24 Jaggali
25 Jambuvulu
26 Kadaiyan (in the districts of Tirunelveli, Thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai, Thanjavur,
Tiruvarrur and Nagapattinam)
27 Kakkalan (in kanyakumari districts and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
28 -Omitted-
29 Kanakkan, Padanna (in the Nilgiris district)
30 Karimpalan
31 Kavara (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
32 Koliyan
33 Koosa
34 Kootan, Koodan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
35 -Omitted-
36 Kuravan, Sidhanar
37 Madari
38 Madiga
39 Maila
40 Mala
41 Mannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
42 Mavilan
43 Mager
44 Mundala
60
45 Nalakeyava
46 Nayadi
47 Padannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
48 Pagadi
49 -Omitted-
50 Palluvan
51 Pambada
52 Panan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
53 Panchama
54 -Omitted-
55 Panniandi
56 Paraiyan, Parayan, Sambavar
57 Paravan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
58 Pathiyan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
59 Pulayan, Cheramar
60 Puthirai Vannan
61 Raneyar
62 Samagara
63 Samban
64 Sapari
65 Semman
66 Thandan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
67 Thoti
68 Tiruvalluvar
69 Vallon
70 Valluvan
71 Vannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
72 -Omitted-
73 Velan
74 Vetan (in Kanyakumari and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
75 Vettiyan
76 Vettuvan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah of Tirunelvelli district)
61
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED TRIBES) TAMILNADU
1. Adiyan
2. Aranadan
3. Eravallan
4. Irular.
5. Kadar
6. Kammara (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
7. Kanikaran, Kanikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah and Ambasamudram taluk of
Tirunelveli District).
8. Kaniyan, Kanyan.
9. Kattunayakan.
10. Kochu Velan.
11. Konda Kapus.
12. Kondareddis.
13. Koraga.
14. Kota (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
15. Kudiya, Melakudi.
16. Kurichchan.
17. Kurumbas (in the Nilgiris District).
18. Kurumans.
19. MahaMalasar.
20. MalaiArayan.
21. MalaiPandaram.
22. Malai Vedan.
23. Malakkuravan.
24. Malasar.
25. Malayali (in Dharmapuri, Vellore, Pudukottai, Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore, Tiruvannamalai,
Villupuram, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur Districts).
26. Malayakandi.
27. Mannan.
28. Mudugar,Muduvan.
29. Muthuvan.
30. Pallayan.
31. Palliyan.
32. Palliyar.
33. Paniyan.
34. Sholaga.
35. Toda (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
36. Uraly.
62
63