GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
PROSPECTUS FOR ADMISSION TO
BSMS/BAMS/BUMS/BHMS COURSES IN
GOVERNMENT IM&H MEDICAL COLLEGES AND
SEATS SURRENDERED TO GOVERNMENT
IN SELF–FINANCING IM&H MEDICAL COLLEGES
2025 - 2026 Session
(As per G.O(D)No.694/Health and Family Welfare [IM 1-2] Dept.,
dated: 30-06-2025 and as amended from time to time).
LAST DATE FOR SUBMISSION OF FILLED
IN APPLICATION
08.08.2025 upto 5.00 P.M.
SELECTION COMMITTEE,
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY,
ARIGNAR ANNA GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL OF INDIAN MEDICINE CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI – 600 106.
Phone No:-044-26216244
Website: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org
1
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
1 Date of Notification 24-07-2025
2 Date of Commencement of 24-07-2025
online application
3 Last date for online 08-08-2025
submission of application
4 COUNSELLING FOR SPECIAL THE SECRETARY,
CATEGORY AND GOVERNMENT SELECTION COMMITTEE,
SCHOOL STUDENTS UNDER COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN
7.5% RESERVATION: MEDICINE & HOMOEOPATHY,
IN PERSON ONLY ARIGNAR ANNA GOVERNMENT
HOSPITAL OF INDIAN MEDICINE
CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI – 600 106.
5 Date of Declaration of Rank list Will be posted in the official website.
6 Details of counselling Will be posted in the official website
7 Official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org
8 Helpline Number 044-26216244
2
INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
1. Application for Tamil Nadu State 2025-2026 UG (BSMS / BAMS / BUMS /
BHMS) Medical Course for Government seats and Government Surrendered
seats can only be submitted online through Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection
Committee websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org.
Application submitted through any other mode shall not be entertained.
2. a. The registration fee for the application form is Rs.500/- (Rupees Five
Hundred Only) (non-refundable) and it should be paid through online
Bank payment portal in the website. The candidates applying under
Special category for Children of Ex-Servicemen, Eminent Sports Person,
Person with Bench mark Disability (PwD) and Union territory of India (UTI)
should pay an additional fee of Rs.100/- (non-refundable) for each special
category via Bank payment portal.
b. All Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Caste (Arunthathiyar) / Scheduled Tribe
candidates of Tamil Nadu native are EXEMPTED from payment of the
cost of the application.
c. The last date for submission of online application form will be upto 5:00
P.M. on 08.08-2025. Thereafter there is no provision for the candidates to
submit their online application form.
d. Candidates should fill up all mandatory columns, upload all required
documents and submit the duly filled in online application. The candidates
may download their filled in online application form and secure a copy of
the same for their future reference. Subsequent submission of supporting
document(s), is not accepted either on courier / post / or in person.
3. (a) Qualified and eligible candidates are required to register ONLINE on the
Tamil Nadu Ayush Selection Committee website www.tnayushselection.org
to participate in the counselling process for allotment of seat. Tamil Nadu
Ayush Selection Committee does not allot any seat manually. (For all
General Category Seats).
(b) Candidates are deemed to have read, agreed and accepted this
Prospectus and the terms and conditions of the counselling mentioned in
this prospectus for Tamil Nadu State 2025-2026 UG (BSMS/BAMS/
BUMS/ BHMS) courses on completing the online submission of application
form.
3
(c) Candidates are further advised to fill the application form on their own on
the Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee website and not through any
agent or third party. Any mistake committed by the candidate will
prejudice one’s selection.
4. The admissions in the State of Tamil Nadu are as per the provisions of the
Government of Tamil Nadu and in compliance to the National Commission for
Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) and the National Commission for
Homoeopathy (NCH) and shall be solely based on marks obtained in the
National Eligibility-Cum-Entrance Test (NEET (UG) – 2025) conducted by
National Testing Agency (NTA).
5. As per Chapter-6, Clause 6.6 para (2) of the NEET Information Bulletin 2025
issued by the National Testing Agency, the Reservation of the Seats in the
AUSH Colleges for respective categories shall be allotted as per applicable
laws prevailing in the State of Tamil Nadu.
6. As per amended Regulations, the seat matrices for admission in the
Government and Self-Financing Institutions shall be 15% for the All India
Quota and 85% for the State Quota for the academic year 2025 - 2026.
Further Apportionment of seats between Government and Management of
Self–Financing Minority and Non-Minority Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
Medical Colleges will be as per existing State policy and National Commission
for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) and National Commission for
Homoeopathy (NCH) regulations and applicable Court orders.
7. Counselling to Government School students under 7.5 % reservations (as per
the Tamil Nadu Admission to Under graduate Courses in Medicine, Dentistry,
Indian Medicine and Homeopathy on preferential basis to students of
Government schools Act, 2020 (Tamil Nadu Act No.34 of 2020) will be done
ahead of the General Category. The candidate has to appear in person along
with the relevant original certificate at the Selection Committee Office for
counselling.
4
8. Note for Special Category Claim:
i. Special Category (Children of Ex-Servicemen, Eminent Sports Person,
Persons with Bench mark Disability, Union Territories of India and
Heirs of Hereditary IM practitioners) are instructed to submit their
application
in online only.
ii. One candidate can apply a maximum of three Special Categories. For
each special category Rs.100 / - has to be paid separately through
online portal. The claim under Special Category will not be considered,
under any circumstances without the required documents.
iii. Special category rank differs completely from that of the General
Category rank.
iv. Special category candidates cannot claim the same rank in the General
category and vice versa.
v. All the special category candidates except eminent sports persons
should submit the hard copy of their online application form along with
the relevant supportive documents to the address mentioned below.
vi. Candidates applied under the eminent sports person category will be
called in person (Date and time will be intimated through the Official
Website of Selection Committee) with their original Sports Certificates
and relevant documents along with the hard copy of their online
application form for Certificate Verification.
vii. All the special category candidates should submit the hard copy of
application along with all the relevant supportive documents to
The Secretary,
Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy,
Arumbakkkam, Chennai – 600 106.
viii. Counselling for the special categories will be done before the General
Category online counselling. The candidate has to appear in person
along with the relevant original certificate at the Selection Committee
Office for all special category counselling.
ix. In case of unavoidable circumstances special category candidate can
authorize his/her parents on his/her behalf for counselling. The parent’s
decision will be binding on the candidate. An authorization letter given
by the candidate should be submitted by the parents along with original
5
documents of any one of the identification proofs such as voter id,
driving license, pan card, pass port. Aadhar card etc., of both the
parents and candidate has mentioned in the ANNEXURE XIV (A) and
XIV (B).
9. Use one common application form for all courses, namely,
a. Bachelor of Siddha Medicine & Surgery [ B.S.M.S]
b. Bachelor of Ayurveda Medicine & Surgery [ B.A.M.S]
c. Bachelor of Unani Medicine & Surgery [B.U.M.S]
d. Bachelor of Homoeopathy Medicine & Surgery [ B.H.M.S]
10. Before filling up the Application form, read all the instructions carefully. Fill up
the Application form on their own and not through any agent or third party. Any
mistake committed by the candidate will prejudice one’s selection.
11. Provisional Rank list of the eligible candidates, counselling schedule etc., will
be posted in the official website: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org. The Application Registration Number (A.R. No.) will
appear in the Rank List.
12. The candidates are instructed to visit the official website
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org at least twice a day for
latest updates from the date of issue of application to till the end of admission
process without fail. Further, any change or modification and relevant
information pertaining to this counselling / admission process will be
made available on the official website only.
13. Selection Committee will not be responsible for consequences resulting due to
non-diligent follow up of notices, notification and publications appearing on the
website regarding admission to BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS Degree
Courses under Government Quota Seats for 2025 - 2026 session
14. The Candidates are advised to read the Information Bulletin and instructions
for NEET – UG – 2025, carefully, issued by the National Testing Agency
(NTA), without fail. For detailed qualifying Criteria, please visit the website:
www.ntaneet.nic.in.
15. The Candidates allotted to B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S. / B.U.M.S. / B.H.M.S.
courses under State Quota through Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy Department,
Arumbakkam, Chennai, will alone be registered for UG course in The
Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R Medical University.
6
16. This Prospectus is applicable for Government Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy Medical Colleges and Government Quota seats in Self-
Financing Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Medical Colleges in Tamil Nadu.
17. *PAYMENT DETAILS
Christians
OC/BC/ converted SC/SCA/
Description TIME
BCM/MBC from ST
SC/SCA/ST
Registration fee for
500 500 Exempted While applying
online application
Special Category
100 100 Exempted While applying
Online Processing Before choice
500 500 500
fee filling
Advance Tuition Free
At the time of
fee Payment for (If income is less than 2.5
5000 submission of
Government lakhs with valid Income
choice filling.
College Seats. Certificate)
1. Rs. 5000 / - at
the time of
Advance Tuition Free submission of
fees for Self- 10000 (If income is less than 2.5 choice filling.
Financing Colleges (5000 + lakhs with valid Income 2. Rs. 5000/- at
under Government 5000) Certificate) the time of
Surrendered seats downloading
allotment
order.
7
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
PROSPECTUS
1. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
Candidate should be a citizen of India.
2. NATIVITY
i. Candidate should be a Native of Tamil Nadu.
ii. Other State candidates who have studied from VI Standard to XII Standard
continuously in Tamil Nadu, have to produce their School Bonafide
Certificate from the School in which candidate studied VI standard to XII
standard will be considered under the Open Category.
Note:
a. Candidates who are native of Tamil Nadu studied from VI to XII Std. either partly
or completely in schools situated outside Tamil Nadu should upload the “Nativity
Certificate”. Such candidates should also give an undertaking that they have not
applied for any Educational Institution in any other State, claiming the nativity of
such State for admission. If it is found later that the candidate has applied as a
native of any other State other than Tamil Nadu, then the admission will be
cancelled at any stage. Further, even during the course of study if it is
subsequently found they any candidate has produced a false nativity certificate
or given a false undertaking, it will result in expulsion of the candidate from the
course and also initiation of criminal proceedings against the candidate as well
as his/her parents as per provision of the law.
b. The Certificate of Nativity in Tamil Nadu should be issued by the competent
authority only in the specified format available (ANNEXURE IV) in the
Prospectus.
c. Applications without a proper Nativity Certificate will not be considered.
d. Candidates belonging to other States and residing in Tamil Nadu cannot claim
nativity of Tamil Nadu.
e. Permanent Residence Certificate in lieu of Nativity Certificate will not be accepted.
f. Foreign Nationals are NOT eligible to apply for admission to B.S.M.S./B.A.M.S./
B.U.M.S. / B.H.M.S courses 2025 - 2026 session.
g. Producing false nativity certificate if detected at any time later during the course of
study will result in expulsion of the candidate and also initiation of criminal
proceedings against the candidate as well as the parents as per law.
8
h. The Nativity Certificate obtained previously or e-Nativity Certificate obtained in
the latest updated format issued not below the rank of Zonal Deputy Tahsildar of
the concerned Revenue Jurisdiction is accepted.
i. Community Certificate obtained from other States will not be considered for
reservation and such candidates will be treated as open category.
3. AGE LIMIT (For Details kindly refer clause 5.1.1. of NEET UG – 2025 Bulletin)
No candidate shall be admitted to BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS Degree Course
st
unless one has attained the age of Seventeen Years on or before the 31
December, 2025 of his/her admission to the first year of the undergraduate
AYUSH courses and there is no upper age limit. (Evidence for the age e.g. birth
certificate, 10th mark sheet should be uploaded).
4. COMMUNITY CERTIFICATE:
a. Candidates should produce Community Certificate obtained from the Revenue
authorities of their respective districts with competent jurisdiction as detailed
below:
S. No. Name of the Issuing Authority
Community
1. Scheduled Tribe (ST) Revenue Divisional Officer of their native
place or Sub-Collector of their Districts
(except Chennai) or P.A (General) to
Collector of Chennai. The Community
Certificate card issued by Tahsildars upto
11.11.89 is valid.
2. Scheduled Caste (SC) / Tahsildar of Native Taluk of the Candidate
Scheduled Caste
Arunthathiyar (SCA)
3. Backward Class (BC) / Headquarters Deputy Tahsildar / Zonal
Backward Class Muslim Deputy Tahsildar / Deputy Tahsildar
(BCM) / Most Backward (Certificates)
Class (MBC) / Denotified
Communities (DNC)
b. The candidature claimed after submission of application without Community
Certificate will be treated only as Open category.
9
c. If a candidate of Tamil Nadu origin obtains community certificate from other
State, candidates will be considered under Open Category only if candidates
fulfil the norms otherwise.
d. If a candidate submits a false / fabricated Community Certificate, Nativity
Certificate or any other Certificate, if it is found at a later point during the
course of the study, it will result in expulsion of the candidate from the course
and also legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated against the
candidate and their parents as per provision of law.
5. EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
(i) Admissions to all State Quota seats of Undergraduate Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani
and Homoeopathy Courses will be done through NEET (UG) – 2025 as per the
provisions of the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (Minimum
Standards of Undergraduate Ayurveda Education), Regulations 2022, National
Commission for Indian System of Medicine (Minimum Standards of
Undergraduate Siddha Education), Regulations 2022 and National Commission
for Indian System of Medicine (Minimum Standards of Undergraduate Unani
Education), Regulations 2022, and National Commission for Homoeopathy
(Homoeopathy Graduate Degree Course – BHMS), Regulations 2022 NCISM
(NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM MEDICINE) & NCH
(NATIONAL COMMISSION OF HOMOEOPATHY) are Regulatory Bodies of the
above-mentioned Courses under the Ministry of AYUSH).
(ii) In order to be eligible for admission to BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS Degree
courses for this academic year, it shall be necessary for a candidate to obtain
th
minimum of marks at 50 Percentile in NEET UG-2025. However, in respect of
candidates belonging to Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Castes (Arunthathiyar), Backward Classes, Backward Classes (Muslim) and
Most Backward Classes / Denotified Communities, the minimum marks shall be
th
at 40 Percentile in NEET UG-2025. In respect of candidates with Bench mark
Disabilities specified under Rights of persons with disability Act 2016, the
th
minimum marks shall be at 45 Percentile for General Category candidates
th
and 40 Percentile for ST / SC / SCA / MBC / DNC / BCM and BC candidates
in NEET UG-2025.
10
Note:
Provided further that where sufficient number of candidates in the respective
category fail to secure minimum marks in the National Eligibility – cum –
Entrance Test held for any academic year for admission to undergraduate
programme, the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine &
National Commission for Homoeopathy, in consultation with the Central
Government may at its discretion lower the minimum marks required for
AUSH admission to undergraduate programme for candidates belonging to
respective category and marks so lowered by the Central Government shall
be applicable for that academic year only.
(iii) Further, to be eligible for admission to BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS Degree
courses, Candidates must have passed in all the subjects of the qualifying
examination of the Higher Secondary Certificate Examination (Academic)
conducted by the Tamil Nadu State Board or any other equivalent Board with
the subjects of Physics, Chemistry, Biology / Botany and Zoology / Bio-
technology and English
(iv) The Candidate shall have passed 10+2 (or equivalent) with Physics, Chemistry,
Biology or Biotechnology. The minimum standards of UG regulations stands
withdrawn for eligibility criteria for ASU courses as per letter Ref. No BOA/2-
B/UG/2025 dt. 11-07-2025 from Secretary NCISM.
NOTE: Candidates who have passed any other equivalent examinations with
same subjects as mentioned above in clause 5 (iii) should produce Migration
certificate from respective Board / University; and Candidates who have passed
any other equivalent examinations (i.e., other than the Tamil Nadu State Board /
CBSE / ISCE) with same subjects as mentioned above in clause 5 (iii) should
produce the eligibility certificate from The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University at the time of admission in respective colleges.
(v) Candidates qualified in the NEET (UG) - 2025 and who have passed the
qualifying examinations from National Institute of Open Schooling or State
Open Schools or as private candidates from recognized State Boards; or with
Biology / Biotechnology as an additional subject shall be allowed but subject to
the outcome of Special Leave Petitions / Appeals filed by the Medical Council
of India. [As per NEET (UG) 2025 Guidelines]
11
Note: * “The proviso in italics has been a subject matter of challenge before the
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad, Lucknow Bench,
and Hon’ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur. The provisions of the
regulations disqualifying recognized Open School Board candidates and the
candidates who have studied Biology / Biotechnology as an Additional Subject
has been struck down.”
(v) Language qualification for BSMS / BUMS Courses:
(a) FOR BSMS COURSE: In addition to the required minimum percentile in the
NEET UG- 2025
1. The candidate should have studied in Tamil medium upto X or XII
Standard, or
2. The candidate should have studied Tamil as a subject upto X or XII
Standard, or
3. The candidate must be prepared to pursue the study of Tamil Language
as a subject during the First-year course of B.S.M.S. course, to become
eligible to take the other subjects’ examination of the B.S.M.S. Course.
(b) FOR BUMS COURSE: In addition to the required minimum percentile in
the NEET UG-2025. (As per Gazette notification CG-DL-E-02032022-
233801, Part II – Section 4 dt. 28-02-2022)
1. The Candidate should have studied in URDU Medium upto X or XII
Standard, or
2. The candidate should have passed Urdu/ Arabic / Persian as a subject
upto X or XII Standard, or
3. The candidate must be prepared to pursue the study of Urdu Language
as a subject during the First-year course of B.U.M.S. course, to become
eligible to take the other subjects’ examination of the B.U.M.S. Course.
6. INELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
The following categories of candidates are NOT ELIGIBLE to apply for B.S.M.S. /
B.A.M.S. / B.U.M.S. / B.H.M.S. Courses.
a) Candidates who have passed Higher Secondary Certificate Examination in
Vocational Stream or Pre-University Course in Tamil Nadu.
b) The selection and admission of candidates of other than those in clause 5 (iii)
will be provisional subject to recognition of the qualifying examination by the
Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University under which the candidate gets
12
admitted. In case, the recognition is not accorded for the admission of the
candidate on any grounds, the provisional admission will not entitle the
candidate for the continuance of the course and the admission will be
cancelled.
c) Candidates presently pursuing the B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S. / B.U.M.S. / B.H.M.S.
Courses are NOT ELIGIBLE to apply for B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S. / B.U.M.S. /
B.H.M.S. Courses respectively, during this academic session.
d) Candidates’ native of other States and studied in other States.
e) Candidates declared ineligible by AACCC website are not eligible for
further counselling after the date of announcement of ineligibility.
7. PROCEDURE FOR FILLING AND SUBMISSION OF ONLINE
APPLICATION FORM:
1. The candidates are advised to take a print out of the Prospectus from the
official website and read it carefully, along with the parent / guardian before
filling up the online application form for the academic year 2025-2026.
2. The candidate should log in to the following website:
- www.tnayushselection.org
3. The application forms will be available online from 24-07-2025 onwards till
08.08.2025 upto 5:00 P.M.
4. The candidate should pay the non-refundable registration fee for
online application cost of Rs.500/- (Rupees Five Hundred only).
5. Candidate has to fill all the mandatory columns in the online application. All
the relevant documents should be uploaded in PDF format. Candidates are
instructed to submit the online application after filling up all the required
fields.
6. Request for change in any particulars after submitting the online application
form shall not be entertained under any circumstances.
7. Candidates are instructed to upload the following certificates while filling the
online application form and submit.
i. NEET- UG 2025 Admit card and Score card.
ii. Class X Mark Sheet (both sides of Certificate) / Birth Certificate
iii. Class XI Mark Sheet (both sides of Certificate).
iv. H.S.C. Mark sheet (both sides of Mark Sheet) or any other equivalent
examination.
13
v. Transfer certificate obtained after the completion of H.S.C. or
equivalent examination/ or any other courses.
vi. Candidates of other States need to upload a certificate of proof of study
from VI Std. to XII Std. who have studied completely in Tamil Nadu.
vii. Community Certificate.
viii. Nativity certificate.
ix. Documents of Parent need to be uploaded for the candidate who claim
their native as Tamil Nadu as follows: -
Community Certificate of either one of the parents obtained from the
competent Revenue Authority in Tamil Nadu (Who claims communal
reservation)
x. Front page of the Bank Pass Book or cancelled cheque leaf of the
candidate / guardian (for refund purpose).
xi. Special Category Form with relevant certificates for Persons with Bench
mark Disabilities, Eminent Sports Person, Ex- Servicemen and Union
Territories (Pondicherry, Andaman and Nicobar) as applicable, along
with the online application form should be uploaded.
xii. Bonafide Certificate from Chief Educational Officer is mandatory to the
candidates who have studied VI Std. to XII Std. in Tamil Nadu
Government Schools for 7.5% Special Reservation as mentioned in
Annexure - XI. (If they don’t have EMIS No.)
xiii. Valid Income Certificate of parent for the candidates claiming fee
exemption.
xiv. Eligibility Certificate obtained from the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University, Guindy, Chennai for the candidate of other Universities /
Boards (except State Board, CBSE Board & ISC Board)
xv. Court orders (if any).
xvi. Additional supporting documents (if any).
NOTE: After submitting the filled in online application, the candidates are advised
to download their filled in online application form for future reference.
8. All the entries in the online application form should be filled by the candidate
carefully. The candidate should ensure that all information including the
14
marks in the qualifying examination furnished by the candidate in the
application and the enclosures are true and correct. The candidate is
informed that after proper scrutiny of the application, if the marks furnished
by the candidate in the application are not correct or any other information is
found to be incorrect, then;
a. Candidates will forfeit the admission, no matter at what stage of the
course, at that time
b. Candidates will be debarred from pursuing any other course for a period
of three years
c. Legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated against the candidate
along with their parents/guardian for furnishing false Mark Sheet / false
Community Certificate / false Nativity Certificate.
9. Even if the candidate is provisionally selected for the AUSH admission but
found to have failed in +1 examination, the provisional admission of the
candidate will automatically stand cancelled.
10. Instructions for filling the Online Application Form:
• The candidate and the parent / guardian must ensure candidates
eligibility criteria before submitting the online application form. The
candidates are instructed to go through the Prospectus carefully and
be clear about all the instructions with regard to the submission of the
online application form.
• The application form other than the one filled in online mode will not
be accepted, under any circumstances.
11. Candidate should login to the following website to access application form
for AUSH Courses 2025-2026 session. www.tnayushselection.org
12. Candidate should fill the following particulars in the online application form:
1. Aadhaar Number of the candidate.
2. Name of the candidate
3. Name of the Parent / Guardian
4. Permanent Address / Address for communication
5. Mobile No.
6. Email ID
7. Gender
15
8. Date of Birth
9. Community, Caste and details
10. Religion
11. Mother tongue
12. Nationality
13. Nativity
14. NEET – Roll Number, Register Number, Score, All India NEET Rank and
number of Attempts in NEET.
15. Qualifying Examination, +2 Roll. No., Year of passing Class EMIS No.
16. Medium of Instruction
17. Marks details
18. Whether studied in Tamil Medium up to X Std. or Higher Secondary
course
19. Whether studied Tamil as a subject in X std. or Higher Secondary
course
20. VI to XII/ Equivalent and Undergoing / completed any professional
courses.
21. a. State / District of Class VI to XII / Equivalent
b.The candidate those who are claiming the 7.5% reservation
should
produce the details of the School studied from VI to XII
Standard.
22. Special Categories
23. Parent Occupation
24. Annual income of the parent
25. Civic details
26. Native district
27. Eligibility Certificate (if applicable)
28. First Graduate details (if applicable)
29. Uploading documents
a. Same passport size photograph which was uploaded in NEET UG-
2025 examination must be uploaded in the online application form.
16
The same should be submitted at the time of admission at the allotted
AUSH Medical College.
b. The candidates should upload their signature in running hand writing
(4kb to 20 kb) in the appropriate box given in the online application
form. Placing initials as signature is not acceptable. Writing full name
in the box in capital letters would also not be accepted as signature
and the application form would be rejected.
c. The candidates must ensure that photograph and signature are
uploaded in the respective fields.
13. Candidates are instructed to submit only one application form.
14. Candidates should ensure that all information entered in the online
application are correct at the time of online submission of application form.
15. Incomplete applications and applications not in accordance with instruction
will not be considered and are liable to be rejected. The application fee once
paid will not be refunded.
16. Submission of online application and remittance of fee would close as per
the schedule given and no request for extension of time shall be entertained.
Application once submitted cannot be withdrawn.
8. METHOD OF FEE PAYMENT:
i. Mode of payment is through Debit Card / Credit card / Net banking / UPI /
Wallet (G-Pay, Paytm etc.,). Necessary facilities have been provided for
making payment through payment portal by using Net Banking or other
modes.
ii. Candidates must note that mere deduction of fee from the Bank account
is not a proof of fee payment.
iii. Check the validity of the Debit card / Credit card and keep everything
ready while logging on to the website for submitting application form.
Candidate should enter the information asked for and make payment
through the portal.
iv. The Advance tuition fees will be refunded to the candidate who has been
allotted a seat and not joined in 1st and 2nd round of counseling, only to the
account whose details are provided along with the application form.
v. The advance Tuition Fees paid to the Selection Committee will be
17
adjusted towards the Tuition fee that has to be paid to the college, after
the conduct of Registration Sub-Committee meeting by The Tamil Nadu
Dr. M G R Medical University to get adjusted against the Tuition Fees to
be paid by the candidates whose names are registered by the University.
vi. The Candidates who discontinue the course after joining, at any stage
within the cut-off date will forfeit all the fees including the Advance Tuition
fee paid by him/her.
vii. All payments including the advance Tuition fee will be forfeited if a
candidate who has been allotted a seat in the Round 3 or subsequent
Rounds and does not join the respective institution. Also, the advance
Tuition fee will be forfeited if the admission gets cancelled due to any
reason. E.g. in case, the candidate gives wrong information at the time of
registration and on the basis of which a seat may be allotted and later
cancelled by the Admission Authorities or at the time of reporting the
candidate fails to produce the required documents (within stipulated
time).
9. SPECIAL CATEGORIES WITH THEIR CODE NUMBERS
The list of SPECIAL CATEGORIES WITH THEIR CODE NUMBERS is furnished in
the Annexure – I. If sufficient number of eligible candidates are not available for
allotment against any of the 25 seats (except Five Seats for Malaysian candidates)
in BSMS, 6 seats in BAMS, 7 seats in BUMS and 7 seats in BHMS reserved for the
SPECIAL CATEGORIES listed under Annexure-I, the vacant seats will be reverted
back to the General Pool of seats and filled up with candidates from merit list
applying rule of reservation.
10.
CATEGORIES OF SEATS
The lists of Government AUSH Medical Colleges and Self-Financing AUSH
Medical Colleges are furnished with the details of Courses offered and
seats available in the Annexure – II and III respectively.
(i) CATEGORY I – GOVERNMENT AUSH MEDICAL COLLEGES:
The seats available in BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS courses in
Government Medical Colleges.
(ii) CATEGORY II – GOVERNMENT QUOTA SEATS IN SELF-FINANCING
AUSH MEDICAL COLLEGES:
18
Allotment of seats to BSMS / BAMS / BHMS courses in Self Financing
Medical Colleges will be based on the merit and following the Rule of
Reservation and subject to the availability. Apportionment of seats between
Government and Management in Self-Financing Colleges of Indian Systems
of Medicine are as follows:
Nature of the Institution Government Quota / Management Quota
Surrendered Seats Seats
65% of 85% (of 35% of 85% (of
Non-Minority Self
sanctioned strength of the sanctioned strength of the
Financing Institution
institution) Institution)
50% of 85% (of 50% of 85% (of
Minority Self Financing
sanctioned strength of the sanctioned strength of the
Institution
institution) Institution)
Candidates who wish to apply for seats under All India Quota and Management
Quota in Self-financing Colleges of Ayurveda, Siddha and Homoeopathy under
The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R Medical University have to apply separately. A
separate Prospectuses will be issued accordingly and may check the
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org for more details in this
regard.
11. DURATION OF THE BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS COURSES
Five and half (5 1/2) years of study including one year Compulsory Rotatory
Residential Internship.
12. METHOD OF SELECTION AND ADMISSION
(i) Provisional Rank List of the eligible candidates shall be prepared on the
basis of the marks obtained in NEET UG-2025 and candidates shall be
admitted to the above courses from the said rank list only. The Secretary,
Selection Committee will publish the tentative rank list on the following official
website: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org.
(ii) Further all admissions on preferential basis (7.5 percentage) [as per the Tamil
Nadu Admission to Undergraduate Courses in Medicine, Dentistry, Indian
Medicine and Homeopathy on preferential basis to students of Government
schools Act, 2020 (Tamil Nadu Act No.34 of 2020)] to the Government School
students counselling will be done ahead of the General Category. The
candidates have to mention the EMIS number clearly.
19
(iii) A separate rank list shall be prepared on the basis of the marks obtained in
National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (NEET-UG 2025) for B.S.M.S. /
B.A.M.S./ B.U.M.S. / B.H.M.S. Courses for the academic year 2025 -2026 for
the Special Categories as well as the 7.5% seats allocated for the candidates
seeking admission under the Tamil Nadu Admission to Undergraduate
Courses in Medicine, Dentistry, Indian Medicine and Homeopathy on
preferential basis to students of Government Schools Act, 2020 (Tamil Nadu
Act No.34 of 2020). Further all admissions on preferential basis (7.5%) to
Government School students and admissions for Special categories will be on
horizontal reservation basis.
(iv) Candidates those who are not having EMIS No. should obtain and enclose a
Bonafide Certificate from the School or Schools (as the case may be) studied
from the Headmaster / Headmistress in the prescribed format for their
studying 6th standard to 12th standard and should be counter signed by the
respective Chief Educational Officer of the respective District. The
prescribed format is annexed as Annexure XI to this prospectus.
(v) In case, candidates have studied in more than one Government school, they
should produce the Bonafide certificate from the current / last studied school
covering the details of the schools studied earlier also.
13. RULE OF RESERVATION
The selection will be made on merit basis and by counselling, applying rule of
reservation as laid down by the Government of Tamil Nadu. BC / BCM / MBC /
DNC / SC / SCA / ST candidates are also eligible for selection under open
competition as per merit in addition to the reservation made for them as per their
communities.
Open Competition 31%
Backward Community 26.5%
Backward Community (Muslim) 3.5%
Most Backward Community / 20%
Denotified Community
Scheduled Caste & Scheduled Caste 18%
(Arunthathiyar) (16% of seats out of 18% quota
earmarked to SCs shall be allocated to the SCA
communities)
Scheduled Tribe 1%
20
Note: In respect of B.U.M.S Course the seats will be filled as per rule of
reservation; if seats remain vacant due to non-availability of candidates in
respective category in Round I, the vacant seats will be filled in under Open
Competition as per merit in subsequent rounds of counselling.
14. All selections and admissions for BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS Courses are
only provisional. The Selection and admission is liable to be cancelled at any
time as and when the eligibility conditions are found to be defective or incorrect
or of any suppression of facts deliberately or otherwise. The right of allotment to
BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS courses and Colleges is vested totally with the
Selection
Committee.
15. COUNSELLING:
a. Selection of candidate will be done only through online counselling based
on Provisional Rank List.
b. Selection Committee is the Designated Authority for counseling for all
admissions to undergraduate courses in Siddha, Ayurveda, Homoeopathy
and Unani medicine in all Government, Self-financing AUSH Institutions of
Tamil Nadu. (except for government seats in AIQ).
c. No authority or Institution shall admit any candidate to the undergraduate
course in contravention of the criteria or procedure as laid down by NCISM
(National Commission for Indian System Medicine) / NCH (National
Commission of Homoeopathy) in respect of admissions and any candidate
admitted in contravention of the said criteria or procedure shall be
discharged.
d. The authority or Institution which grants admission to any student in
contravention of the criteria or procedure shall be liable to face action in
terms of provisions of the NCISM (National Commission for Indian System
Medicine) and NCH (National Commission of Homoeopathy) regulation 2022.
e. Selection will be made on the basis of NEET UG-2025 score and by
counselling duly applying the Rule of Reservation followed by the
Government of Tamil Nadu. Candidates should the attend counselling
round as per the schedule mentioned in official website
www.tnayushselection.org.
21
f. Candidates who fail to fill the choice in any round within the stipulated time
as mentioned in the selection committee official website, for whatsoever
reasons, will be given a chance to fill their choice and lock them in the
subsequent round of the existing available vacancies only irrespective of their
provisional rank.
g. Candidates who are getting allotment, for any other reasons, at a later date
or time after the counselling / individual’s turn is over will be given a seat in
the existing vacancies available in any one of the colleges irrespective of
their merit of marks.
h. The candidate is eligible to opt for any of the courses viz. BSMS / BAMS /
BUMS / BHMS course in Government and Self-Financing colleges based on
the availability of seats during his / her turn.
i. Any remaining unfilled seats for want of adequate number of eligible
candidates belonging to SC(A) communities shall be filled by candidates
belonging to SC community other than Arunthathiyars as per merit and vice
versa (G.O. (Ms) No. 55, P&AR Dept., dated: 08.04.2010)
j. Any remaining reserved seats in ST quota for want of adequate number of
eligible candidates belonging to ST community shall be allotted to candidates
belonging to SC community as per merit (G.O. (Ms) No. 77, Health and
Family Welfare (MCA1) Dept., dated: 24.02.2011).
k. Any remaining unfilled seats in BCM Community for want of adequate
number of eligible candidates after exhausting the merit list shall be filled up
on merit basis by candidates belonging to BC community without exceeding
the quota for BC community as a whole (G.O. (Ms) No. 30, Health and Family
Welfare (MCA1) Dept., dated: 18.01.2012).
l. Mutual transfers will not be allowed under any circumstances.
m. Those who obtained allotment order to a particular course in a particular
category and college during the counselling who do not join within the
stipulated time to that particular course and college to which they are allotted,
will not be considered for admission at any point of time later.
n. Counselling Schedule will be made available on the website only.
22
7.5% Government School Special Category Counselling:
a. Counselling for Special Categories and all admissions on 7.5%
preferential basis to Government School students will be done prior to the
General Category Counselling. The candidate have to appear in person
along with the relevant original certificate at the Selection Committee
Office for counselling.
b. There will be no re-allotment / change of college for candidates allotted
under the Special Category. The candidates allotted seats under 7.5%
preferential allotment to Government school students will not be allowed
for General counselling.
c. Any Discontinued / Not Joined / Un-availed vacancies in Special Categories
(Except 05 Malaysian Candidates) will be reverted back to General
Category.
d. Any Discontinued / Not Joined / Un-availed vacancies in 7.5% quota will be
reverted back to General Category after the complete exhaustion of 7.5 %
quota merit list.
e. The candidates who failed to attend the first round of Counselling on the
specified date and time will forfeit their right to admission and their names will
not be considered later. However, he / she can authorize his / her parent on
his/her behalf for that round of counselling due to unavoidable circumstances
and the parent’s decision will be binding on the candidate. An Authorization
letter along with undertaking given by candidate should be submitted by the
parents along with the original documents of any one of the identification
proofs such as Voter ID, Driving License, Pan Card / Passport of both the
parent and the candidate as mentioned in Annexure XIV A & XIV B.
f. All Communications regarding Counselling will be displayed / available
through the official website only and any change or modification and
relevant information pertaining to this admission process will be made
available immediately on the websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org.
g. The candidates are instructed to visit the website at least two times a day for
updates from the date of release of application till the end of admission
process without fail. Selection Committee will not be responsible for
consequences resulting due to non-diligent follow-up of notices, notification
23
and publications appearing on the website regarding admission to B.S.M.S. /
B.A.M.S. / B.H.M.S. Courses under All Quota 2025 - 2026 session.
h. Candidates can exercise their option for the course and the college of their
own choice at the time of counselling and allotment is subject to availability of
seats.
i. Individual request for transfer of college or change of course will not be
entertained after allotment of seat is made.
j. No candidate can opt to be waitlisted for a particular college when seats are
available in other colleges for the particular Community / Category / Course at
his / her turn.
k. Candidates who have been allotted in special category will not be allowed for
general category.
l. The 7.5% Government school Quota for newly added colleges in 2nd round,
vacant seats of 7.5% Government school Quota will be conducted before
general counselling of Second round.
m. If a candidate opts out of / not willing to take either Government / other
category of seats, when seats are available in the particular course at the time
of his / her counselling, then he/she will not be eligible for the same seat in
that particular course at any point of time later for whatsoever reason.
n. Re-allotment is not a matter of right of the candidate. Re-allotment will be done
only through counselling on merit basis following the communal reservation if
vacancies are available. If sufficient time is not available, vacancies will be
filled up with the candidates from the 7.5% quota waiting list on merit basis
only.
16.
ROUNDS OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
There are four Rounds of counselling
1. Round 1
2. Round 2
3. Round 3
4. Stray Round
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR COUNSELLING:
a. All the candidates attending Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
online counselling for Government and Government Surrendered self-
financing UG courses should pay a non-refundable amount of
24
Rs.500/- (Rupees five hundred only) towards online processing fee
for counselling at the time of choice filling.
b. At the time of choice locking candidate should pay refundable
advance tuition fees of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) for
both Government Quota Seats and Government Surrendered Seats
in Self Financing ASUH Medical Colleges.
c. This advance tuition fees amount will not be refunded after
allotment of seats in third round of counselling.
d. For Government Quota Seats and Government Surrendered
Seats Rs. 5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) is exempted for
“SC/SCA/ST/BC (Converted to Christianity) from Scheduled
Caste, candidates, if annual income is less than 2.5 Lakhs.”
e. The counselling Schedule will be available in the official website
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org from time to time.
f. Candidates are instructed to register and Choice lock the seats for
each Round of counselling within the stipulated date and time as
mentioned in the counselling Schedule.
g. Candidates should be careful while choice filling and it is advisable to
choose preferred Colleges only.
h. Candidates could edit their choices but once the candidate locks their
choices during the online counselling it cannot be changed later.
i. Admission to AUSH course shall be made by online counselling on
the basis of rank by applying the rules of reservation based on the
preference of Choices given by the candidate.
j. Candidates are advised not to share Login ID, Password and OTP
with others.
k. Mutual transfer/Individual request for transfer of college will NOT be
permitted under any circumstances.
l. Provisionally selected candidates for Government Surrendered
seats can download the provisional allotment order by paying
the additional advance tuition fee Rs.5,000/- (Rupees five
thousand only). The balance tuition fee for Government
Surrendered seats should be paid at the time of admission to the
college (refer clause No. 19).
25
m. For Self-Financing AUSH Colleges, Advance tuition fee is
exempted for “SC/SCA/ST/BC (Converted to Christianity)
from Scheduled Caste, candidates, if annual income is
less than 2.5 Lakhs” at the time of downloading the
allotment order.
n. Candidates who joined in Round 3 of All India Quota or State
Quota shall not be eligible to participate in the further Rounds
for all quota counselling for this academic year (i.e.) 2025-2026
as per information bulletin NCISM (National Commission for
Indian System Medicine).
“Kindly note that Medical Counselling Committee of NCISM (National
Commission for Indian System Medicine), MoHFW has developed Software for
all the participating States / Counselling Authorities for NEET-UG to upload the
name and Roll numbers of students who have joined upto Round-3 and further
Rounds of the State Quota or Round-3 of the All India Quota on the common
portal.”
I. ROUND 1 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
a. The candidates should pay a non-refundable amount Rs. 500/-
(Rupees Five Hundred only) towards online processing fee and
Advance Tuition Fee (Refundable up to Round 2) amount for
Government Quota Seats and Government Surrendered Seats
Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) via online Bank payment
portal.
b. A candidate who has taken a seat and Not Joined/ discontinued the
course within the stipulated time will be eligible to attend the
subsequent Rounds of online counselling for the academic year 2025-
2026.
c. Re-allotment is permitted during the Round 2 and Round 3 of
counselling based on rank following the rules of reservation.
d. If a candidate fails to join the College within the stipulated time, in the Round
1 or Round 2 of counselling candidates will be permitted to participate in the
Round 2 or Round 3 of online counselling respectively.
26
II. ROUND 2 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
a. Candidates who had locked their choices Round-1 and did not get
any seat allotted are not required to lock their choice again. Also,
candidates who have allotted the seat in Round-1, but not joined in
the college need not lock their choice again. Candidate who have
allotted the seat in round-1 and joined the college and wish to opt for
upgradation need not lock their choice again.
b. Fresh choice filling is permitted in this Round for those candidates
who have not locked their choices in Round-1 (with the payment of
processing fee and advance tuition fee).
c. Candidate who wishes to retain their seats (who don’t want a change
in college) need not participate in Round-2.
d. If upgraded in Round 2, the candidate has to relinquish the seat from
Round 1 and join the seat allotted in Round 2.
e. Candidates should be careful while choice filling and it is advisable to
choose preferred colleges only.
f. Candidate could edit their Choice(s) but once the candidate locks
their choice(s) during the online counselling, it cannot be changed
later.
g. If the candidate is reallotted in Round 2, then the BSMS / BAMS /
BHMS seats allotted to candidates during Round 1 of Counselling will
be allotted to other candidates in descending order, not in ascending
order.
h. A candidate who has taken a seat and not joined/ resigned the
course within the stipulated time will be eligible to attend the
subsequent Rounds of online counselling for the academic year
2025-2026.
i. If the candidate has joined but Discontinued the course after the
stipulated date of resignation he /she will be eligible to attend the
Round-3 of online counselling for the academic year 2025-2026, but
they will have to forfeit the registration fee and tuition fees paid by
him/her.
27
j. Candidates who are allotted seats in Round 1 but who don’t report or
join in the allotted institute can participate in further Rounds (without
forfeiture).
k. Candidates getting upgraded in Round 2 shall NOT have any claim
on Round 1 seat.
Virtual vacancies: Any candidate who has been allotted a seat in Round 1 and
has opted for upgradation in Round 2, that allotted seat of Round 1 will be
shown as virtual vacancy in Round 2 and all candidates can fill their choice for
the said seat during the choice filling in Round 2. However, such seats will be
allotted in Round 2, only if the allotted candidate of Round 1 vacates/upgrades
in Round 2 then that virtual vacancy becomes a real vacancy.
III. ROUND - 3 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
When a candidate is scheduled to attend the Round-3 online counselling,
then the candidate has to pay the Processing Fee of Rs.500/-(non-
refundable) via online Bank payment portal. The candidates who have
already paid the Processing fees during previous Rounds of counselling
need not pay again if they have not been allotted seats.
ELIGIBLE CANDIDATES FOR ROUND-3:
a. Candidates who locked their choice in Round-1 or Round-2 and did not
get any seat allotted are not required to lock their choice again.
b. Fresh choice filling is permitted for Round-3 those candidates who have
not locked their choice in Round-1 or Round-2 (with the payment of
processing and advance tuition fees).
c. If upgraded from Round 1 or Round 2, the candidate must get relieved
from Round-1 or Round-2 seat and join Round 3 seat.
d. Candidates who joined in Round 3 of All India Quota or State Quota shall
not be eligible to participate in the further Rounds for All India Quota or
State Quota for this academic year (i.e) 2025-2026 as per information
bulletin NCISM.
e. Once the candidate joins the seat allotted in Round 3, he/she cannot
upgrade or resign from this seat.
f. If any candidate does not join the Round 3 allotted seat, candidate will
have to forfeit the online processing fee, advance tuition fees paid by
him/her. And they will also be not eligible to participate in the subsequent
Rounds of counselling.
28
IV. STRAY ROUND OF COUNSELLING:
a. Stray vacancies if arises after the third round of Counselling. Stray
vacancy counselling will be conducted by the Selection Committee as
per the directions of the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy and also as per the guidelines of NCISM (National
Commission for Indian System Medicine) / NCH (National Commission of
Homoeopathy).
b. Fresh registration is allowed in this Stray round with the payment of non-
refundable registration fee for online application RS.500 (Rupees five
hundred only)
c. At the time of choice filling, all the candidates must pay non-refundable
online processing fee of Rs. 500/- (Rupees five hundred only).
d. At the time of choice locking candidate should pay advance tuition fee of
Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) to participate in stray round or
subsequent round (if any) via online bank payment portal which is not
refundable.
e. For Self-Financing AUSH Colleges, Advance tuition fee is exempted for
“SC/SCA/ST/BC (Converted to Christianity) from Scheduled Caste,
candidates, if annual income is less than 2.5 Lakhs” at the time of choice
locking and downloading the allotment order.
f. Candidates who are not holding any seats in AUSH course will be
eligible to participate in this Counselling.
g. Candidates who have joined in All India and State Quota seats for AUSH
will not be eligible to participate in this counselling.
h. If the seat is allocated in stray vacancy the candidate has to download
the allotment order and join in the college within the stipulated date and
time as mentioned in the order. To download Allotment Order the
candidate should pay an additional tuition fee of Rs.15,000/- (Rupees
fifteen thousand only).
j. If the candidate fails to download the allotment order or downloaded the
allotment order and fails to join the college within the stipulated date and
time his/her advance tuition fees will be forfeited. They also will not be
able to participate in TN AUSH Counselling for subsequent one
academic year.
29
k. If a candidate joined the college and discontinued the course the
candidate should pay the Discontinuation fee of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees
one lakh only) and the paid tuition fees will not be refunded.
l. Allotted candidates during Stray vacancy Round, if they fail to join they
will have to forfeit the Advance tuition fees. They also will not be able
to participate in Tamil Nadu AUSH Counselling for subsequent one
academic year.
m. If it is found that a candidate is/was involved in impersonation /
suppression or misrepresentation of facts and production of falsified /
bogus certificates, his/her provisional allotment order will be cancelled
and legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated.
n. If during the NEET 2025 or at any stage of allotment / admission process
of AUSH Admission in Tamil Nadu 2025-2026 or in the admission
process of AUSH course in Tamil Nadu 2025-2026 at the allotted
College, the candidate has indulged in any case of impersonation i.e. not
matching the photograph /signature / documents of the candidate etc.,
He/ She shall be handed over to the Police by the Principal / The
Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, as the case may
be and the cases shall be dealt as per the Indian Penal Code for further
investigation. Such candidates will be debarred permanently from
appearing for the AUSH Admission in Tamil Nadu in future in addition to
the cancellation of his/her candidature in the medical admission in Tamil
Nadu.
o. The Selection Committee will not be responsible for approvals
obtained/annual renewals and other applicable statutory approvals of
various authorities including NCISM (National Commission for Indian
System Medicine) / NCH (National Commission of Homoeopathy),
infrastructure and the rules and regulations of the Self-Financing Private
ASH Medical Colleges. Hence, candidates are advised to go through the
respective college websites and NCISM (National Commission for Indian
System Medicine) / NCH (National Commission of Homoeopathy)
websites and satisfy themselves before giving their option for selection of
such seats by the candidates. The Selection Committee shall neither be
responsible nor shall entertain any case on the above grounds.
30
Note: The vacancies arising after the stray round of counselling will be kept
vacant.
17. Counselling / Allotment for the seats newly created due to provision of seat matrix
after the commencement of first round counselling by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R.
Medical University or due to the orders / interim orders passed by the Honorable
st round
High Court Madras after the commencement of 1 counselling will be done
nd
ONLY during the 2 round counselling but within the cutoff date for UG Courses
admission as laid down by the regulatory bodies ie., NCISM (National
Commission for Indian System Medicine) & NCH (National Commission of
Homoeopathy) / Ministry of AYUSH.
18. Candidates getting allotment through court orders before the cutoff date will be
given a seat in the existing vacancies available at the time of existing rounds of
counselling when he/she actually attends.
19. FEE STRUCTURE:
Sl.No. Course The Fee Structure for Self-Financing
Colleges (Per Annum) for the year 2025 -
1 BSMS 2026 - Rs.1,25,000/- (inclusive of A Tuition
fee (RS. 80,000), Admission fee, Special
2 BAMS
fee, Laboratory / Computer / Internet fee,
Library fee, Sports fee, Maintenance and
3 BHMS
Amenities fee, extracurricular activities fee,
and other recurring expenditure, as fixed
by the Committee on Fixation of Fee in
respect of Self Financing Colleges from
time to time).
a. Detailed information regarding Caution Deposit, Scholarship, Fee
Concession, Hostel Fees, if availed, University Registration Fees,
Examination Fees, etc. can be obtained from the Head of the Institution in
which the candidate joins.
b. Candidates selected for UG courses for 2025 -2026 session through
Counselling and who will be the first graduate in their family will be exempted
from paying only the tuition fees (Rs. 80,000/-) in both Government and Self-
financing colleges as per G.O.no.85/Higher Education (J2) Dept.
dt.16.04.2010. Candidates should furnish the self-attested Photostat copies
31
of supportive documents prescribed in this regard and also to fill up the
Annexure-VIII (a) and VIII (b).
c. The students of SC / SCA / ST and Converted Christian (Christian Adi
dravidar) community whose parental annual income is less than
Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two lakh Fifty Thousand only) are exempted from
payment of only the advance tuition fees (Rs. 5000/- (Rupees five thousand
only) only for ISM Medical Colleges / Institutions and Rs. 10,000/ - (Rupees
ten thousand only) for the Self financing ISM colleges (As per G.O.Ms. No.
06/ Adi Dravidar and Tribal Welfare Department, dated 09-01-2012).
Candidates should furnish supportive documents like valid Income Certificate
and Community Certificate obtained from the competent authority along with
the application.
d. Candidates admitted under 7.5% preferential allotment are exempted from
payment of Tuition fee and any other fee as applicable.
e. The candidates (except for SC / SC(A) / ST and Converted Christians whose
parental annual income falls below 2.5 lakhs and in possession of original
valid income certificate at the time of counselling and also candidates
admitted under 7.5% preferential allotment) who are selected and allotted:-
(i) At the time of choice filling in a Government Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy Medical College the candidate shall remit a sum of
Rs.5000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) by online payment portal
only.
(ii) At the time of choice filling against Government surrendered Seats in
Self- Financing Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Medical College the
candidates shall remit a sum of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees five Thousand only)
and at the time of downloading allotment order the candidates shall
remit a sum of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees five Thousand only) by online
payment portal only.
(iii) This will be adjusted towards the Tuition fee that has to be paid to the
college.
(iv) After the conduct of Registration Sub-Committee meeting by The Tamil
Nadu Dr. M G R Medical University to get adjusted against the Tuition
Fees to be paid by the candidates whose names are registered by the
University. The candidates who discontinue the course after joining, at
any stage within the cutoff date will forfeit all the fee including the
advance tuition fee paid by him / her.
32
20. SEATS RESERVED FOR SPECIAL CATEGORIES IN GOVERNMENT
MEDICAL COLLEGES
Counselling for Seats reserved through Horizontal Reservation for
Government Schools studied candidates (admission on preferential basis 7.5%)
will be done first and then it will be followed by the counselling for filling up of
seats earmarked for the Special Categories following the Horizontal Reservation.
The seats will be allotted as per the merit order in the concerned special category
and those seats will be deducted in the concerned compartment (OC/BC/BCM/
MBC/DNC/SC/SC(A)/ST) and the remaining seats will be allotted to the General
Category. If required eligible candidates are NOT available for the seats
earmarked under admission on preferential basis and Special Categories, those
earmarked vacant seats will be added to the General Pool and allotment will be
made on merit basis. The other eligibility conditions for admission to BSMS /
BAMS / BUMS /BHMS courses will be applicable as in the case of General
category. The list of Special Categories is furnished in Annexure – I.
(I) SEATS RESERVED FOR CHILDREN OF EX-SERVICEMEN
BSMS BAMS BUMS BHMS
1 1 1 1
NO. OF SEATS RESERVED
(i) The candidate should furnish a certificate as prescribed in the Annexure – V
obtained from the competent authority.
(ii) The special committee from the Directorate of Ex-servicemen Welfare
constituted for this purpose will scrutinize certificates submitted by the
candidates and the candidate will be selected on merit basis
(II) SEATS RESERVED FOR EMINENT SPORTS PERSON
BSMS BAMS BUMS BHMS
1 1 1 1
NO. OF SEATS RESERVED
(i) Selection will be done by the Common committee constituted for this
purpose at Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu. The mode of
selection will be as per the guidelines given in Annexure – VI.
(ii) The candidates should submit two sets of Self-attested Photostat
Copies of certificates and testimonials of sports evidence along with
33
application (one set will be transmitted to the Common Committee, Sports
Development Authority of Tamil Nadu) to the office of the Selection
Committee in person on or before the last date prescribed for submission
of application. Scrutiny of the Sports Certificate will be made by Common
Committee at Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu. Decision of the
Common Committee shall be final.
(iii) Candidates are requested to arrange the certificates in chronological order
starting from June 2020 as given in the Annexure VI (A) and submit along
with the application in person. All the particulars are to be filled up as per
the guidelines given in the Annexure- VI. The other eligibility conditions for
admission to BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS courses will be applicable as
in the case of General category. If the candidate has same sports mark,
their NEET rank will be considered to arrive sports merit list.
(III) SEATS RESERVED FOR PERSONS WITH BENCH MARK DISABILITY
BSMS BAMS BUMS BHMS
8 3 3 3
NO. OF SEATS RESERVED
(i) 5% of the total numbers of seats available in Government Medical
Institutions are reserved for the candidates with benchmark disability.
(ii) The reservation for this category is based on, for BAMS/BSMS/BUMS as
per the Gazette notification dated 18/06/2019 and in BHMS as per
the Gazette notification dated 19/06/2019.
(iii) Candidates with disability of 40-80% shall be considered eligible to apply for
BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS. The other conditions for admission into
BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS courses will be applicable as in the case of
the General Category.
(iv) Candidates with less than 40% disability are not eligible for reservation but
eligible for General Category.
(v) Candidates are requested to produce a certificate from the District Medical
Board of the district concerned constituted for this purpose assessing the
nature and the extent of physical disability in the format prescribed in the
Annexure –VII. The candidate must have obtained the certificate within
3 months prior to submission of the application for seeking admission
under this category. If the certificate has been obtained earlier, the
34
application will be rejected. The candidates seeking admission under
this category should produce the full-size photograph exhibiting the
deformity.
Note: 1. The selected candidates for BSMS/BAMS/BUMS/BHMS course will be
required to undergo second medical examination by a Medical Board
constituted for the purpose by the Directorate of Medical Education to
ascertain and confirm the nature and extent of physical disability.
“Presence of significant Locomotor Disability with or without any
other Significant disability such as visual or hearing–speech or
learning etc. which will make it very difficult for the candidate to
pursue and complete the course satisfactorily and may significantly
increase the risk to the candidate or the patient(s) – may be declared
NOT ELIGIBLE for admission”.
2. The decision of the Commissioner, Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy, in
this regard shall be final.
(IV) (V) & (VI) SEATS EARMARKED IN BSMS/BAMS/BUMS/BHMS COURSES
FOR THE NOMINEES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
NO. OF SEATS BSMS BAMS BUMS BHMS
(IV) CRaEndSidEaRteVsE D from 3* 2*
Deficient States / Union
(1–Puducherry,
(2–Puducherry -- 1
Territories
1– Andaman &
1 – Kerala)
Nicobar Island)
(V) Bay of Bengal Initiative
for Multi Sectoral Technical
& Economic Co-operation
2 -- -- --
(BIMSTEC) Country
candidates
(VI) Candidates from
5 -- -- --
Malaysia
* The candidate has qualified in NEET UG 2025 and seats are subjected to change
as per AACCC, NCISM (NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM
MEDICINE), Government of AYUSH, Government of Tamil Nadu sanctions.
To Whom
Category of Nominating Selecting
nomination are
Reservation Authority Authority
to be sent by
35
them
(IV) Candidates from The allotted deficient state / Union Commissioner of
Deficient States / Union T e rritory Governments are Indian Medicine
Territories. requested to utilize the slots / seats and Homeopathy,
made available to them by Chennai-106.
recommending / nominating
suitable NEET qualified candidates
for admission to degree courses to
the colleges allotted to them under
intimation to the Ministry of
AYUSH, Government of India, New
Delhi. The deficient State / Union
Territory Governments should
shortlist candidates on the basis of
NEET merit list only.
(V) Bay of Bengal The ICCR is the Nodal Agency for -Do-
Initiative for Multi the purpose of nomination,
Sectoral Technical & selection etc., under AYUSH
Economic Co-operation scholarship scheme on behalf of
(BIMSTEC) Country Ministry of AYUSH, New Delhi and
Candidates. Ministry of External Affairs,
Government of India, New Delhi.
(VI)Candidates from The ICCR is the Nodal Agency for -Do-
Malaysia (G.O.(D). the purpose of nomination,
No.31, Health and selection etc., under AYUSH
Family Welfare (IMI) scholarship scheme on behalf of
Department, Ministry of AYUSH, New Delhi and
dated:12.01.2001. Ministry of External Affairs,
Government of India, New Delhi.
NOTE:
1. Candidate applying against the seats reserved under categories V and
VI above should possess the minimum educational qualification and all
minimum marks prescribed for open competition.
2. Candidate applying against the seats under categories IV, V and VI
36
above should do so only through online portal.
3. Candidate applying against Special Category (IV) above should send
the filled in downloaded application to the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, the Government of Union Territory or Deficient State and one
self - attested copy of the application should be submitted in advance
within the stipulated last date to the Secretary, Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Government of
Tamil Nadu.
4. Candidate applying against Special Categories (V) and (VI) mentioned
above should send the filled in application to the Ministry of External
Affairs, Government of India, New Delhi through their respective
Governments and also to the ICCR central office and one self-attested
copy of the application should be submitted in advance within the
stipulated last date to the Secretary, Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Government of
Tamil Nadu.
5. Candidate applying against Special Categories (V) and (VI) should
produce the eligibility certificate obtained from The Tamil Nadu Dr.
M.G.R. Medical University before the counselling date or before
attending the counselling.
(VII, VIII and IX) SEATS EARMARKED FOR HEIRS OF HEREDITARY
REGISTERED INDIAN MEDICINE PRACTITIONERS IN SIDDHA, AYURVEDA
AND UNANI RESPECTIVELY.
(VII) Son / Daughter of Hereditary Siddha BSMS BAMS BUMS
Practitioners who have registered in the ‘B’
class or B2 in Tamil Nadu G.O.Ms.No.885, 5*
Health and Family Welfare Department, seats ----- -----
dated 12.6.1991 and those enlisted to
Registration vide G.O.(D) No.118, Health
rd
and Family Welfare Department, dated 23
February 1995.
(VIII) Son / Daughter of Hereditary Ayurveda
Practitioners Vide G.O.(D)No.699 / Health 1*
----- -----
and Family Welfare/IMI/2/department, Seat
dated: 02.07.2010
(IX) Son / Daughter of Hereditary Unani 1*
----- -----
Practitioners who have registered with Seat
37
Board of Indian Medicine, Tamil Nadu as
per G.O.Ms.No.1374/Health and Family
Welfare (IM.II) department, dated:
28.10.1993.
* Seats subject to availability of candidates (only son/daughter of hereditary
Siddha, Ayurveda and Unani practitioners as per GOs mentioned).
21. All the entries in the application form should be uploaded by the candidate in
his/her own and not through any agent and third party. The candidate should
ensure that all information including the marks in the qualifying examination
furnished by him/her in the application and the enclosure are correct. The
candidate is informed that after proper scrutiny of his/her application, it is found
that the marks furnished by him/her in the application are not correct or any
other information is found to be incorrect, then;
a. He / She will forfeit the admission no matter at what stage of the course
he
/ she will be at that time;
b. He / She will be debarred from pursuing any studies for a period of
three years;
c. Legal action will be initiated against the candidate and the parents
for furnishing incorrect information;
d. Criminal action will be instituted against him/her for furnishing false Mark
Sheets etc.
22. The Selected Candidates should produce all the original documents at the
time of admission to the Principal of the Medical Colleges concerned.
Selection will be cancelled if the candidates do not produce the original
documents at the time of admission.
23. Selected candidates should produce a Physical Fitness Certificate obtained from a
Registered Medical Practitioner not below the rank of Assistant Surgeon or “A”
Class practitioner Registered with Tamil Nadu Board of Indian Medicine or Board
of Integrated Medicine or Tamil Nadu Siddha Medical Council, Chennai or Tamil
Nadu Homoeopathy Medical Council, at the time of joining the course.
24. DISCONTINUATION FEES
(i) Candidates selected for admission and his/her parent /guardian will have to
execute an Agreement Bond as prescribed in Annexure–XII. Failure to
execute the Agreement Bond will lead to cancellation of selection.
38
(ii) Candidates who discontinue the course on or after the last cut off date for
admission process for the academic session 2025 -2026 and on any date of
the subsequent year are bound by the bond and thereby, they shall have to
pay a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only) as penalty for having
breached the contract in the bond by means of Demand Draft drawn in
favour of “The Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai-106”
payable at Chennai.
Note: This penalty is only for candidates who discontinue the course and not for
re- allotment and movement from one to another category / College / Course.
25. Candidates selected for admission and his / her parent / guardian will have to sign
Discipline Declaration form in Annexure – XIII and failure to sign the declaration
will result in the cancellation of selection.
26. Candidates selected for admission to BSMS/BAMS/BUMS/BHMS Courses are not
guaranteed any appointment in Government Service.
27. Hepatitis-B vaccination:
All candidates selected for admission to first year BSMS/BAMS/BUMS/ BHMS
course should take the Hepatitis-B Vaccine before admission to these Courses
and only on producing a certificate in Annexure – IX, the Principals will admit the
candidates. The students should take further doses at the prescribed intervals as
required.
28. In respect of selected candidates adequate original documentary evidence shall be
required and verification may also be done to decide on their eligibility under
various categories.
29. Enquiry or any correspondence regarding the selection of candidates will not be
entertained.
30. Ragging:
The Candidates who join BSMS/BAMS/BUMS/BHMS Course should not
indulge or participate in any kind of ragging. If they are found to have
indulged in ragging in past or noticed later, the candidates will be removed
from roll of institution at whatever stage of study and criminal action will be
taken against candidates.
31. If proof of Authenticity of Certificate could not be obtained by the Institution on time,
the candidate will not be allowed to continue the 2nd year of study.
39
32. The Government orders issued and to be issued from time to time pertaining to any
of the matters contained in this Prospectus should be read as part and parcel of this
Prospectus and such terms and conditions in the Government order are deemed to
have been incorporated in this Prospectus.
33. No admission, re-allotment / transfer shall be made after cut-off date for the
academic year as per the guidelines issued by the MoA (Ministry of AYUSH) /
NCISM, NCH (NATIONAL COMMISSION OF HOMOEOPATHY) and The Tamil
Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University.
34. COVID-19 INSTRUCTION
The special category and 7.5% quota seats candidates and their parents are
instructed to follow the standard preventive measures to reduce the risk of COVID-
19 during the counselling as per the Government order time to time.
40
CHECK LIST FOR AUSH ADMISSION 2025-2026 SESSION
CATEGORY- I: CANDIDATES WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU AND
STUDIED SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII- STD IN TAMIL NADU
CATEGORY - II: CANDIDATES WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU BUT
STUDIED SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII- STD PARTLY/ FULLY IN
OUTSIDE TAMIL NADU
CATEGORY - III: CANDIDATES WHO ARE NON - NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU AND
STUDIED SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII- STD
CONTINUOUSLY IN TAMIL NADU
CERTIFICATES/ DOCUMENTS CATEGORY I CATEGORY II CATEGORY III
DOCUMENTS OF CANDIDATE’S ARE AS FOLLOWS:
NEET-2025 Admit Card ✓ ✓ ✓
NEET-2025 Score Card ✓ ✓ ✓
X-Mark Sheet ✓ ✓ ✓
XI and XII –Mark Sheets ✓ ✓ ✓
Transfer Certificate ✓ ✓ ✓
Nativity Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil ✓ ✓
Nadu
Community Certificate from Competent Authority of
✓ ✓
Tamil Nadu (except- OC)
Certificate for Proof of Study from VI Std. to XII Std. in
✓ ✓
Tamil Nadu (From the Head of schools where studied)
Birth Certificate ✓ ✓ ✓
Eligibility Certificate obtained from the Tamil
Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Guindy, Chennai for
✓ ✓ ✓
the candidates of other Universities /Boards
(except TN State Board and CBSE and ISCE Board)
Special Category Certificates for Persons with Bench
mark Disabilities, Eminent Sports Person and Ex- ✓ ✓ ✓
Servicemen (if applicable)
Candidate’s Aadhar card ✓ ✓ ✓
DOCUMENTS OF PARENTS ARE AS FOLLOWS:
Parent Community Certificate from Competent Authority
✓ ✓
of Tamil Nadu(except- OC)
Income Certificate of parent for the candidates claiming fee
✓ ✓
exemption
41
ROUND FREE RESIGNATION EXIT WITH Eligibility FOR DISCONTINUATION FEES
EXIT FORFEITURE FURTHER AFTER JOINING
OF FEES COUNSELLING
Round 1 Allowed Allowed Allowed to Eligible for NIL
exit further
counselling
Round 2 Allowed Allowed only Allowed to Eligible for If the candidates resign before
once within exit within further the stipulated date in Round 2
stipulated stipulated counselling the candidates will be allowed
time time without free exit.
forfeiture
After the stipulated date in
round 2, discontinuation fees
will be Rs.1 lakh and forfeit
Advance tuition fees and
tuition fees.
Round 3 Not Not allowed If not joined, Not allowed in After joining the allotted seat
allowed forfeit Advance next round of round 3, discontinuation
tuition fees and fees will be Rs.1 lakh and
Tuition fee. forfeiture of Advance tuition
fees and tuition fees will also
apply.
Round 4 Not Not allowed If not not eligible for After joining the allotted seat
(Stray allowed joined forfeit next one year. of Stray round, discontinuation
round) Advance fees will be Rs.1 lakh and
tuition fees & forfeiture of Advance tuition
Tuition fee fees and tuition fees will also
and not apply.
eligible for
next one
year
42
ROUND CANDIDATE FORFEITURE OF FEES ELIGIBILITY
If allotted Can participate in round 2 for
No forfeiture of fees
and joined re- allotment
If allotted and
not Can participate in subsequent
No forfeiture of fees
joined/Resigne rounds of counseling
Round 1 d
If not allotted Can participate in subsequent
rounds of counseling
If not choice Can participate in subsequent
locked rounds of counseling
No forfeiture of fees. Allowed to Allowed for further rounds of
If allotted
vacate seat once before the counseling
and joined
stipulated date.
If allotted / No forfeiture of fees Allowed for further rounds of
Re-allotted counseling
and not
joined
Round 2 If not choice
No forfeiture of fees Eligible for round 3
locked
If wants to Forfeiture of advance tuition fee Not eligible for round 3
discontinue and pay discontinuation fee
after the
stipulated date
and time
If not allotted Eligible for round 3
If allotted Not allowed to vacate seat. Not allowed for further rounds
and Joined If wants to discontinue, then of counseling
forfeit Advance tuition fees and
pay Discontinuation fee
Round 3 If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for stray round
Not joined
If not allotted Eligible for stray vacancy
If not choice
Eligible for stray vacancy
locked
Not allowed to vacate seat.
If wants to discontinue, then
If allotted
Stray forfeit
and Joined
vacanc Advance tuition fees and pay Not eligible for next one year.
y Discontinuation fee
If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for next one year.
Not joined
43
Annexure–I
SPECIAL CATEGORIES WITH THEIR CODE NUMBERS
(in respect of Government Medical Colleges only)
Code
Special Category Number of Seats Reserved
No.
BSMS BUMS BHMS BAMS
Chenna Palayamkottai
i
1 1 1
01 Children of Ex-Servicemen
— 1
02 Eminent Sportsperson — 1 1 1 1
03 Persons with Benchmark
3 5 3 3 3
Disability
04 * Candidate from Deficient 2
State / Union Territories
2+1 1 (1
(2 Pudhucherr Pudhucherry,
-- -
Pudhucherry, y 1 Andaman &
1 Kerala) Nicobar
islands)
05 Bay of Bengal Initiative for
Multi Sectoral Technical &
Economic Co-operation
-- 2 -- -- -
(BIMSTEC) Country
candidates
06 Candidates from Malaysia 3 2 -- -- --
07 Heirs of Hereditary
Registered Siddha 2 3 — — —
Practitioners
08 Heirs of Hereditary
— — — — 1
Registered Ayurveda
Practitioners
09 Heirs of Hereditary
Registered Unani — — 1 — —
Practitioners
Total 8 17 7 7 6
* Candidates of other States are requested to apply in All India Quota through
www.aaccc.gov.in for government colleges and separate application for Self-
Financing colleges to this office.
44
Annexure - II
LIST OF GOVERNMENT MEDICAL COLLEGES
All India State
Sl. No. Name of Annual Quota Govt.
Name of the Institution the Course intake (AIQ) Quot
a
1 GOVERNMENT SIDDHA
MEDICAL COLLEGE,
BSMS 100 15 85
PALAYAMKOTTAI
2 GOVERNMENT SIDDHA
MEDICAL COLLEGE,
BSMS 60 9
CHENNAI. 51
3 GOVERNMENT AYURVEDA
MEDICAL COLLEGE, KOTTAR,
BAMS 60 9 51
NAGERCOIL
4 GOVERNMENT UNANI
MEDICAL COLLEGE,
BUMS 60 9 51
CHENNAI.
5 GOVERNMENT
HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
THIRUMANGALAM, BHMS 50 8 42
MADURAI.
TOTAL SEATS 330 50 280
45
Annexure -III
LIST OF SELF-FINANCING MEDICAL COLLEGES AND TENTATIVE ANNUAL INTAKE
Tentative
Sl. Name of the
Name of the Institution Annual
No. Course
intake
1. AKILA THIRUVITHANCORE SIDDHA VAIDYA
SANGAM, MUNCHIRAI,
KANYAKUMARI DISTRICT- 629171. BSMS 60
Phone:04651-235355, 9487510810.
Email: atsvssmc@gmail.com
2. ANNAI SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE,
KOVILACHERI, KUMBAKONAM,
TANJAVUR – 612 503. BSMS 100
Phone: 9976918228, 8124867752.
Email : annaisiddha@gmail.com
3. EXCEL SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE AND
RESEARCH CENTRE,
KOMARAPALAYAM,
BSMS 60
NAMAKKAL – 637303.
Phone: 9842713789
Email : admission@excelcolleges.com
4. JSA MEDICAL COLLEGE FOR SIDDHA AND
RESEARCH CENTRE, 38, TRICHY-CHENNAI
HIGH WAY, NH45, PALI, ULUNDURPET,
BSMS 60
KALLAKURICHI – 606104
Phone:7550333113, 9597890742, 6381989939
Email : jsasiddha@gmail.com
5. R.V.S SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE,
KANNAMPALAYAM,
COIMBATORE-641402 BSMS 30
Phone;0422-2681123,2681124, 9443597157.
Email: rvs_siddha@yahoo.co.in
6. NANDHA SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE &
HOSPITAL,
PITCHANDAMPALAYAM,
BSMS 60
ERODE – 638052.
Phone: 04294-222006, 7373712227.
Email : nandhasiddha@gmail.com
46
7. MARIA SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE AND
HOSPITAL, THOTTAVARAM,
MOOVATUMUGHAM POST, THIRUVATTAR,
100
KANYAKUMARI DISTRICT-629177. BSMS
Phone:04651-282578,282579
Email : mariasiddhacollege@gmail.com
8. SIR ISSAAC NEWTON SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE,
APPAKOVIL, ANTHANAPETTAI-POST,
NAGAPATTINAM-611 102
BSMS 60
CELL : 8248692698, 9842450111
Email : principalsinsiddha@gmail.com
9. SIVARAJ SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE,
SIDDHAR KOIL ROAD,
THUMBATHULIPATTY,
BSMS
PERUMAMPATTY POST SALEM – 636 50
307. Phone:0427-2481006, 2481007
Email: sivarajcolleges@yahoo.com
10. SRI SAIRAM SIDDHA MEDICAL
COLLEGE & RESEARCH CENTRE,
SAILEO NAGAR, WEST TAMBARAM,
BSMS 50
CHENNAI-44
Phone: 044-22512050 , 7530055222
Email: principal@sairamsiddha.edu.in
11. VELUMAILU SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE
AND HOSPITAL, 48,GRAND WEST TRUNK
ROAD, BANGALORE HIGH ROAD,
SRIPERUMBUDUR, KANCHEEPURAM -602 BSMS 40
105
Phone: 044 27162722, 27162980
Email: velumailusiddha@yahoo.co.in
12. SHRI INDRA GANESAN INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL
SCIENCE MEDICAL COLLEGE,
MANIKANDAM, TRICHY-620 012.
BSMS 100
PHONE: 8508688841, 7373333444.
Email : indraganesantrust@gmail.com,
director@indraganesaninstitutions.com
13. SUDHA SUSEENDRAN SIDDHA MEDICAL
COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL, PARAKUNNU ROAD,
VANNIYOOR, KALIYAKKAVILAI, K.K. DIST- 629153, BSMS 50
TAMIL NADU. Phone: 04651-244674
47
14. AYURVEDA COLLEGE,
COIMBATORE, 242-B TRICHY ROAD,
SULUR, COIMBATORE - 641 042.
BAMS 40
Phone:0422-26813446,26813447
Email: ayurvedacollege@yahoo.com
15. MARIA AYURVEDA MEDICAL
COLLEGE, THOTTAVARAM,
ATTOOR, THIRUVATTAR P,O, NEAR
BAMS 60
MARTHANDAM,K.K.DIST-629177,
Phone:8489351294, 9442520352
Email: mariaayurvedacollege@gmail.com
16. SRI SAIRAM AYURVEDA MEDICAL COLLEGE
& RESEARCH CENTRE, SAILEONAGAR,
WESTTAMBARAM, CHENNAI-44 BAMS 50
Phone:044-42267777, 7530044222
Email: principal@sairamayur.edu.in
17. NANDHA AYURVEDA MEDICAL COLLEGE &
HOSPITAL, ERODE-PERUNDURAI MAIN
ROAD,
PITCHANDAMPALAYAM BAMS 60
ERODE – 638052
Phone: 04294-222009, 9842220050
Email: nandhaayurveda@gmail.com
18. IMMANUEL ARASAR AYURVEDA COLLEGE&
HOSPITAL,
NATTALAM, MARTHANDAM
BAMS 60
KANYAKUMARI
Phone: 9443606945, 9443606955
Email: iaamcprincipal@gmail.com
19. Dr. HAHNEMANN HOMOEOPATHY
MEDICAL COLLEGE, KONERIPATTI,
RASIPURAMTALUK,
NAMAKKAL DISTRICT - 637 408.
BHMS 100
Phone:7094457208, 9443326082
Email: drhmcrc@gmail.com
20. MARIA HOMOEOPATHIC MEDICAL
COLLEGE, PERAI, ATTOOR,
THIRUVATTAR PO,
NEAR MARTHANDAM, K.K.DIST - 629177, BHMS 60
Phone: 9442520352, 7373057760
Email:mariahomoeocollege@gmail.com
48
21. MARTIN HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGE
& HOSPITAL, DPF MILL COMPOUND,
G.N.MILLS (POST), METTUPALAYAM
ROAD, COIMBATORE - 641029.
BHMS 50
Phone: 0422-2647657,
Email: homoeocollege@gmail.com
22. R.V.S.HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE, 242-B TRICHY ROAD, SULUR,
COIMBATORE -641 402
Phone:0422-2687421 BHMS 50
Email: admissioncell@rvsgroup.com
23. SARADA KRISHNA
HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE,CONVENT JUNCTION,
KULASEKARAM, K.K.DISTRICT -
BHMS 100
629 161
Phone:04651-279448, 280100
Email: college@skhmc.org
24. SIVARAJ HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE AND RESEARCH
IINSTITUTE,
SIDDHARKOIL ROAD,
THUMBATHULIPATTY,
BHMS 50
PERUMAMPATTY (Post),
SALEM 636 307
Phone:0427-481006, 9842721500, 7448883500
25. SRI SAIRAM HOMOEOPATHY
MEDICAL COLLEGE &
RESEARCH CENTRE, SAILEO
NAGAR, WEST TAMBARAM,
CHENNAI-600 044 BHMS 50
Phone:7530033666
26. VENKATESWARA
HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE, NO 4/11,
SAMAYAPURAM MAIN ROAD,
KARAMBAKKAM, PORUR, CHENNAI –
BHMS 100
600116
Phone: 044-24760638,24763676
Email: vhmc2000@yahoo.com
49
27. WHITE MEMORIAL HOMOEOPATHY
MEDICAL COLLEGE, ATTOOR,
K.K.DISTRICT PIN : 629 177, BHMS 100
phone:9442010093, 9486452262
Email: wmhmc062@gmail.com
28. EXCEL HOMOEOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE AND RESEARCH CENTRE,
PALLAKKAPALAYAM(PO),
KOMARAPALAYAM, NAMAKKAL – BHMS 100
637303
Phone: 7339112299
Email: principalbhms@excelcolleges.com
29. SHRI BHARANI HOMEOPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL
PILIKKAL MEDU, KOKKARAYANPETTAI ROAD,
KOKKARAYANPETTAI
BHMS 100
TIRUCHENGODE – 638007
Phone: 9952401633, 7826822335
Email: shribaranihmch@gmail.com
NOTE: Seat allotment will be made to the above colleges subject to approval
of the Government of India, N.C.I.S.M. / N.C.H. New Delhi and affiliation of The
Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University. Refer the categories of seats under
Clause. No. 7 in the prospectus.
50
ANNEXURE - IV
CERTIFICATE OF NATIVITYIN TAMIL NADU
Certified that Dr.
……………………………………………………………………………… S/o. D/o. W/o.
Thiru…………………………………………………………………………….. an applicant for
admission to Post Graduate studies who normally resides at
………………………………………………………………………………………… in Tamil
Nadu, is a Native of Tamil Nadu.
Taluk…………………………………………
District……………………………………….
State………………………………………….
Signature:
Name and Designation:
Office Seal:
Station:
Date:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR NATIVITY CERTIFICATE
1. This Certificate should be issued by an officer of the Revenue Department not
below the rank of Tahsildar in the Taluk concerned.
2. This Certificate should not be issued by the Special Tahsildars, Deputy Tahsildars
such as Loans, Land Acquisition, Election, Excise and HQs, Deputy Tahsildars,
Special Deputy Collectors, Assistant Commissioner of Agricultural Income,
Excise, and Elections etc.
3. This Certificate should be signed also by the Village Administrative Officer.
4. The Certificate should bear the stamp of the office of the Officer signing the
Certificate.
5. Any foreign national irrespective of the period of study in the State will not
become eligible to apply for this course. No certificate of Nativity in the State of
Tamil Nadu, should therefore be issued to Nationals of other countries for this
purpose.
51
6. The certifying officers should insist upon clear proof of the Nativity of the Parent or
Guardian of the candidate and satisfy themselves on the genuineness of the
residential qualification.
7. Permanent Residence Certificate will not be considered as Nativity
Certificate.
8. The guidelines prescribed for the issue of Nativity Certificate and they are as
follows as per Letter No. RA.V(B)16932/2000, dated 3-4-2000 of the Special
Commissioner and Commissioner of Revenue Administration, Chepauk, Chennai-
5.
(i) The parents/guardians of the applicants/students or the applicants
themselves shouldhave permanently resided continuously for a period of five
years in Tamil Nadu.
(ii) Permanently residing for a period of five years should be supported by
Documentary evidence.
(iii) The family ration card, Electoral Roll, Census List if taken recently,
documents like sale deed, tax receipt etc. relating to the property owned by
either of the parents or by the applicant may be verified.
(iv) The Transfer Certificate issued by the School authorities where the applicant
had studied last may be verified to know whether he was in the state for five
years.
(v) Enquiry in the village / place of residence of the neighbour / Village
Administrative Officers regarding continuous residing.
(vi) To ensure that wrong or incorrect address had not been furnished to obtain
thecertificate.
(vii) The birth place, the present place of residence of the parent / father,
Permanent assets, mother tongue, place of education, place of marriage of
the applicant / parents, the period of stay in and outside Tamil Nadu can also
be considered before issuing certificate.
52
Annexure-V
Certificate of Department of Ex-Servicemen’s Welfare
(Website:www.esmwel.tn.gov.in)
Pensioner / Non-Pensioner / Family Identity Card no. < I Card No>
Mobile No: <mobile No> E-mail ID - <email id>
Name of the Applicant: <Name of the Application No. ……………….
OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY / ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EX-SERVICEMEN’S
WELFARE, <DIST>CERTIFICATE OF DEPENDENCY ON EX-
SERVICEMEN
Academic Year 2025 -2026
No. <dist code / Year / Stream / Sl.no> Dated: <date>
This is to certify that Selvan/Selvi/Thiru/ Tmt <Name of the applicant> is
the <relationship> of and is solely dependent on the Ex-Servicemen whose
particulars are furnished below.
He/She is eligible for consideration for admission to professional / Academic
/ Technical / Law / Others (specify) courses in <Stream> against the reservation of
seats for:
(i) Children of Ex-Servicemen
(ii) Children of Ex-Servicemen died / disabled in war / peace time
(iii) Wife / Widow of Ex-Servicemen (Tick the relevant box)
Signature :
Signature of the Candidate: Designation:
SERVICE PARTICULARS OF EX-SERVICEMAN
Regimental No. : <Service No>
Name : <name>
Rank : <rank>
Regiment / Corps : <Regiment / Crops>
Date of enrolment : <DOE>
Date of discharge / death : <DOD>
Cause of discharge : <cause of Discharge>
Whether died / disabled in war / peace :
53
Operation in which Martyred / Disable :
(If applicable)
Character assessed at the time of discharge <Character>
:
Office Seal:
Station: <Office of DD / AD ESM Welfare, Signature:
<Dist> Date: Designation:
Note: This Certificate shall be issued by an Officer of the Department of Ex-
Servicemen’s Welfare of Tamil Nadu not below the rank of Assistant Director of Ex-
Servicemen’s Welfare Board of the District in which the dependent is a NATIVE.
This reservation is applicable only to Tamil Nadu Native Candidates.
54
ANNEXURE VI
SELECTION OF CANDIDATES UNDER QUOTA FOR EMINENT SPORTS
PERSONS FOR 2025-2026 SESSION
1. The purpose of this quota is to recognize and give weightage to the sports eminence
of the candidates and hence marks for sports achievements alone will be considered
in ranking the candidates. The candidates are expected to continue their good
performance in sports, even after admission.
2. The candidate shall submit all the sports certificates along with participation
certificates and relevant forms, issued by Association / Recognized Federation, but
only one highest achievement in a tournament (among the International, National,
State, Regional and District) in an academic year in the sports disciplines listed in
Table VII will be considered for awarding marks.
3. Selection of the candidate will be based on the marks obtained by the candidate
strictly following the guidelines, given in the tables.
Table (I) - Marks for Recognized International Achievement
Sl.
Competition Gold Silver Bronze Participation
No.
1. International (Representing
India Category–IA, IB) – Once in
1000 850 650 400
4 years
2. International (Representing
India Category–II) – Once in 2
500 450 400 250
years
3. International (Representing
400 350 300 200
India Category–III) – Every year
Table (II) - Marks for Recognized National Achievement
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No. Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. National Championships /
National games – Organized by
190 160 130 100
National Federations / IOA
2. School Games Federation of
India (SGFI) National Level 190 160 130 100
Competition
3. Khelo India Youth Games -
190 160 130 100
National Level
55
Table (III) - Marks for Recognized State Championship and State Competition
Allocation of Marks
Sl.
Competition Gold Silver Bronze Participation
No.
1. State Championship
95 80 65 45
Representing Revenue District
– Organized by State
Associations
2. Bharathiar Day Sports Meet
95 80 65 45
(State Level)
3.
Republic Day Sports Meet (State
95 80 65 45
Level)
4. KVS / CBSE / CISCE (ICSE)
95 80 65 45
Board National Sports Meet
5. SDAT State Level Chief
95 80 65 45
Minister’s Trophy for Sports and
Games
Table (IV) – Marks for Recognized Regional Level Achievements
Allocation of Marks
Sl. Competition
No.
Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. KVS / CBSE / CISCE (ICSE) 60 45 30 10
Board
National Sports Meet (Regional
Level)
Table (V) – Marks for recognized District Level Achievements
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No. Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. District Tournaments / Sports 45 30 15 5
Meet / Championships
conducted by District Sports
Associations (recognized by
SDAT/TNOA)
2. District / Education District Inter 45 30 15 5
School Competition (District
3. SDAT - District Level Chief 45 30 15 5
Minister’s Trophy for Sports and
Games
56
4. (a) GUIDELINES FOR INTERNATIONAL TOURNAMENTS:
CATEGORY - I
(I - A) Olympic Games (Summer / Winter), Youth Olympic Games (Summer /
Winter), Commonwealth Games and Asian Games (Games organized in 4 years
frequency by the International Olympic Committee).
(I - B) World Championship, Commonwealth championship, World Cup-
(organized in 4 Years frequency by the International Sports Federations).
Eligibility for athletes requires participation in an event involving at least
seven different countries and such competitions should have been approved by
Indian Olympics Association (IOA), Sports Authority of India (SAI) and Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS).
CATEGORY - II
World Championship, World cup, Asian Championship, SAF Games (South
Asian Games), Commonwealth championship Organized in 2 years frequency by the
International Sports Federation.
Eligibility for athletes requires participation in an event involving at least
seven different countries and such competitions should have been approved by
Indian Olympics Association (IOA), Sports Authority of India (SAI) and Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS).
Open or Invitational or Memorial or any indifferent nomenclature or title of
tournaments or Championships at International level, not approved by any of the
above authority will not be considered for marks.
CATEGORY - III
Asian Championships, Commonwealth Games, World cup, World Championship,
Grand Prix, Grand slam - Organized in Every year by the International Sports
Federation.
Eligibility for athletes requires participation in an event involving at least seven
different countries and such competitions should have been approved by Indian
Olympics Association (IOA), Sports Authority of India (SAI) and Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports (MYAS) Government of India.
1. Participation or achievement in International tournaments will be
considered only with earlier achievements at National and State level tournaments.
Direct participation / Selection trials / Camps any International or National
tournaments will not be considered for award of marks.
57
2. The highest achievement in only one annual regular tournament, officially
conducted in a regular manner by the member National Olympic Committee (NOCs)
authorized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) or International Sports
Federations affiliated to the IOC will be considered for award of marks. The players
/s ports persons representing the Country in such tournaments through Indian
Olympic Association (IA) or respective National Sports Federations recognized by
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India or IOA will be
considered for award of marks in each year.
3. Only tournaments officially recognized by the Indian Olympic Association /
respective official National Sports Federations Recognized by MAYS will be
considered for the award of marks (for each year) from 01.06.2021 to 31.05.2022,
01.06.2022 to 31.05.20223, 01.06.2023 to 31.05.2024 and 01.06.2024 to
31.05.2025.
4. Certificates of Participation or Achievements in tournaments, submitted
along with Form I alone are eligible for marks indicated in Table (I) above (should be
submitted before the last date for submission of application).
5. Players who participated in any of the categories I, II and III, in Table(I)
should produce the copies of the following: -
i. VISA, Immigration entry in passport, clearance from Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports (Government of India), Indian Olympic Association and respective
National Sports Federations including BCCI.
ii. The fixture, draw, schedule of events, players' accreditation,
National Medal, Merit, Diploma, Participation certificate and Form-I issued by the
respective National Sports Federation and certificates signed and issued in the
prescribed format by the President or Secretary General of the National Olympic
Committee of the Organizing Country and International Sports Federation.
4 (b). FOR NATIONAL TOURNAMENTS
1. National tournaments should have been officially be recognized as the regular
annual championship / tournament by MYAS or IOA or SAI or SDAT or SGFI Nationals
conducted every year by school education department in age groups (U-14, U-17, U-19)
or respective official National Sports Federation will be considered (for each year) for
the award of marks.
2. Marks will not be awarded for selection trials and coaching camps.
3.Tournaments conducted by the Federations which are not recognized by the IOA
or MYAS, TNOA or SDAT at National level for a particular period will not be
considered for award of marks.
58
Candidates must have participated at Zonal Cluster, District, Regional, State,
National and International in a particular Game/Sport in the same hierarchical order
as per the existing norms applicable for a particular Game/Sports.
4 (c) FOR STATE TOURNAMENTS
1. State level tournaments should officially be recognized as the regular
annual championship or tournament by respective official State Association or SAI or
SDAT or School Education Department of Tamil Nadu will be considered (for each
year) for the award of marks.
2. Marks will not be awarded for selection trials and coaching camps.
3. Any tournaments conducted by the Association which are de-recognized
by the SDAT at State level for a particular period will not be considered for award of
marks. (Refer Recognized Association list attached in ANNEXURE VI)
4 (d) FOR TAMIL NADU BOARD CBSE/KV SCHOOLS / CISCE - SPORTS
ACHIEVEMENTS
1. Tamil Nadu Board schools, KV / CISCE and CBSE Schools, School Zonal
and School cluster level achievements will not be considered.
2. The candidates participated in the tournament conducted by CBSE and KV
Schools, at Regional / South Zone are equated to Regional Level Achievements and
the National Level Achievements are equated to State level of State / Matric Board
Schools.
5. GENERAL CONDITIONS
1. For consideration of candidates seeking admission under the category of
eminent sports person, he/she should enclose all the attested photo copies of
participation certificates and the relevant forms issued by the competent sports
authorities. The application along with all the sports certificates /relevant
forms/documents as given in 4(a) 5, should be presented for certificate verification
which will be done at Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy, Arumbakkam, Chennai- 600 106.
2. Participation / achievements in each academic year from 01.06.2021 to
31.05.2022, 01.06.2022 to 31.05.2023, 01.06.2023 to 31.05.2024 and 01.06.2024 to
31.05.2025 in sports / games shown in the list alone will be considered for the award
of marks. National or State Level Championships or Tournaments conducted by
Sports Federations or Associations recognized by MYAS or IOA or SDAT or TNOA
alone will be considered for the award of marks. (Recognition of State Associations /
National Federations should be relevant to the year concerned).
59
3. Relevant attested copies of certificates issued by the competent authorities
as detailed below are to be submitted along with the application before the last date
for receiving the applications.
4. Open or Invitational or Memorial or any indifferent nomenclature or title of
tournaments or Championships at District or State or National or International level
will not be considered for marks.
5. District or Inter-District Championship means the championships
conducted by the respective recognized District or State Sports Association for the
State of Tamil Nadu.
6. Direct participation or achievement at any level without participating in the
qualifying level competitions such as District or State or National or direct selection
conducted by District or State Sports Association or National Sports Federation to
represent the District or State or National or International tournaments or
championships will not be considered for award of marks.
7. For International achievements in Tennis, marks for Gold, Silver and
Bronze will be awarded to players who are ranked first, second and third respectively
in the ATP or WTA rankings of International Tennis Federation for awarding
participation marks for the top 5 ranked players will be considered from the ATP or
WTA list published by the International Tennis Federation. Necessary document and
proof should be enclosed by the candidate for National or State level achievement in
Tennis, marks for Gold, Silver and Bronze will be awarded to players who are ranked
first, second and third respectively in the AITA or TNTA at National or State for
awarding participation mark the top 5 ranked players will be considered from the list
published by AITA or TNTA at National or State level based on the ranking.
Necessary documents and proof should be enclosed by the candidate.
8. Certificates should be in printed form and necessary Form-I and II should
be in prescribed format. (Certificates or forms issued in letter pads will be invalid).
9. All other sport disciplines in which ranking is the criteria for assessment of
achievement, rules indicated in item 8 above will be applicable for the award of
marks.
10. For Cricket, the annual official Championships or tournaments conducted
within the country under the auspices of TNCA or BCCI at District or State or
National Level alone will be taken into consideration for that year.
11. Multiple events in a particular sport must be standardized events and in
accordance with the events organized by the approved International Federations.
60
Events newly created and not in accordance with the requirement will not be considered for
award of marks.
12. Participation or achievements of candidates with nativity of Tamil Nadu
who represented Tamil Nadu alone are eligible for marks under National Category•
13. Only Tamil Nadu candidates are eligible to apply for admission under
Sports Quota and only the KVS and CBSE schools within Tamil Nadu are eligible for
marks.
14. A Common Committee for Engineering and Medicine constituted for this
purpose will rank the candidates based on the marks assigned to the certificates
enclosed along with the application. Candidates with a minimum sports mark of 5
and above alone will be considered for ranking.
15. All the achievement certificates are to be supported necessarily by the
relevant participation certificates and appropriate forms.
16. No further enclosures or certificates will be entertained after the last date
for submission of completed application in person.
17. Highest achievement or participation certificates obtained by candidates
at different levels such as District or State or National or International in each year
along with earlier achievements should be enclosed without fail. (A candidate shall
enclose a copy of all eligible certificates for scrutiny).
18. Candidates in proportion to the available seats will be called to appear
before the Common Committee for Engineering or Medicine for verification of the
Originals, followed by counseling after ranking.
19. If any candidate fails to produce the requisite Original Certificates or
Forms, his/her place will be allotted to the candidate next in rank and so on. The
consequential vacancy at the end of the rank list will be filled up from among the
additional candidates according to their ranks.
20. All the highest level of participation or achievement should be supported
by earlier achievements at all levels of competition.
21. Short listed candidates will be called for counselling based on their rank
and branches and colleges will be allotted according to their choices from the
number of seats reserved under sports quota based. Sports quota counselling will be
held before the commencement of general counselling.
22. Candidates securing admissions under Eminent Sports Persons quota
should sign an undertaking at the time of receiving allotment order assuring
participation in sports activities in the college preferred by them.
61
23. Legal action would be taken on parents and candidates for furnishing
bogus documents. They should ensure that the certificates obtained are from
competent authorities.
24. A candidate can utilize the Sports Quota only once for Engineering or
Medicine.
25. List of Games and sports decided by the Concern University.
TABLE (VI) - Competent authority to issue Forms / Certificates
Category Competent Authority Form / Certificate
International President / Secretary of the National
(Representing Sports Federation (recognized by
Certificate and
Nation) Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports /
Form – I
IOA)
Participation certificate / Diploma should
be signed by the President / Secretary
General / Chairman of the organizing
Committee of the host Nation.
National Member Secretary, SDAT or Secretary of Certificate and
Championship the State Association (recognized both by Form – II
(Representing Tamil SDAT and TNOA)
Nadu State)
National Games President or Secretary of IOA and Certificate and
(Representing Tamil Chairman of the organizing committee Form – II
Nadu State)
National Chief Inspector of Physical Education for Certificate and
(Representing National School Games competitions Form – IV
State)
School Games President / Hon. Gen. Secretary, SGFI Certificates and
Federation of Forms
India
(SGFI) (National
Level)
KVS Nationals Commissioner or Joint Commissioner or Certificates
(State Level) KVS
CISCE (ICSE) Deputy Secretary or Chairman of Counsel Certificates
Nationals for Indian School Certificate Examination
(CISCE)
CM Trophy Member Secretary, Sports Development Certificates
(State Level) Authority of Tamil Nadu
SDAT approved Member Secretary, Sports Development Certificates
State level Authority of Tamil Nadu
tournaments
CBSE National A. E. O. – Sports / Secretary, CBSE Certificates
Sports Meet
(State Level)
62
Bharathiar Day District Inspector of Physical Education and Certificates
Sports Meet (State Chief Inspector of Physical Education
Level)
Republic Day District Inspector of Physical Education and Certificates
Sports Meet (State Chief Inspector of Physical Education
KVS Regional Level Assistant Commissioner of KVS Certificates
(Divisional Level)
CBSE South Zone A.E.O. – Sports / Secretary, CBSE Certificates
Sports Meet
(Divisional Level)
District Inter School District Inspector of Physical Education – Certificates
Competitions DIPE and District Education Officer
(District Level)
Table-VII: Sports Quota–2025–List of Sports Disciplines
1. Athletics 29. Powerlifting
2. Atya Patya 30. Roller Skating
3. Badminton 31. Rowing
4. Ball Badminton 32. Rugby
5. Baseball 33. Sailing
6. Basketball 34. Sepak Takraw
7. Beach Volley ball 35. Shooting
8. Billiards and Snookers 36. Silambam
9. Body Building 37. Soft Ball
10. Boxing 38. Squash Rackets
11. Carrom 39. Swimming
12. Chess 40. Table Tennis
13. Cricket 41. Taek–won–do
14. Cycling 42. Tennikoit
15. Fencing 43. Tennis
16. Football 44. Throwball
17. Golf 45. Triathlon
18. Gymnastics 46. Volleyball
19. Handball 47. Weightlifting
20. Hockey 48. Wrestling
21. Judo 49. Wushu
22. Kabaddi 50. Yachting
23. Karate–Do 51. Yogasanas
24. Kho – Kho 52. Cycle Polo
25. Korf Ball 53. Archery
26. Mallakhamb 54. Soft Tennis
27. Motor Sports 55. Canoeing & Kayaking
28. Netball 56. Roll Ball
63
ANNEXURE – VI (A)
SELECTION OF CANDIDATES UNDER QUOTA FOR EMINENT SPORTS
PERSONS FOR 2025-2026 SESSION
Declaration of the Candidate for Sports Quota
Name of the candidate:
Registration Number :
(Plus Two / Equivalent Examination)
Details of sports certificates enclosed*
e V Eligible Marks
r a e Y c im e d a c A / la n o it a n r e t n I / e t a t S / la n o it a N / la n o is iv iD t c ir t s iD e h t f o e m a N t e e m s t r o p S e n ilp ic s id s t r o p S n u J ( r a e Y & h t n o M 5 2 0 2 y a M o t 1 2 0 2 I / I I / s m r o F t n a v e le ) o N / s e Y ( d e s o lc n d lo G) I ( r e v liS ) I I ( e z n o r B ) I I I ( n o it a p ic it r a P M To a t r a k l s
Re
2024-2025
(XII Std.)
2023-2024
(XI Std.)
2022-2023
(X Std.)
2021-2022
(IX Std.)
Total No. of Grand
Certificates Total
enclosed
* Highest achievement/participation certificates obtained by candidate at different levels
such as district/State/National/International in each year along with earlier achievements
should be enclosed without fail. Nothing prevents a candidate enclosing all eligible
certificates for scrutiny but may be arranged as per the serial number starting from June
2021 and submitted along with the application.
DECLARATION
The information furnished above and all the enclosures submitted by me are true. Should
it however be found that any information furnished therein is untrue with respect to sports
details, I realize that I am liable for criminal prosecution and I also agree to the forfeiture of
my seat under sports quota.
Signature of the Parent Signature of the Candidate
Date: Date:
64
Annexure – VII
CERTIFICATE OF DISABILITY
(As per GoI Gazette Notification No.93, dated: 16.02.2022),
For admission to B.A.M.S/B.S.M.S/B.U.M.S/B.H.M.S. Courses)
Certificate No………………….. Date………………
Recent
Name of the Designated Disability Centre (as per annexure):
Passport Size
Photograph of
This is to certify that Dr. / Mr. / Ms. / the candidate
……………………….………………………. aged …………………. Years, Son / duly attested
by the issuing
Daughter of Thiru………………………………………. Residing at
authority.
…………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………….
NEET UG - 2025 Roll No………………………… Rank No. ………………………, has the
following
Disability (Name of the Specified Disability) ………………………………………………… (in
percentage) of ….…………………… (in words)………………………..( in figure)
………………………………………………………...
• Please tick on the “Specified Disability”
(Assessment may be done on the basis of Gazette of India. Extra ordinary, Part-III, Section
4) similar to MCI notification.
Sl. Disability Type of Specified Disability Range
No. Category Disabilities Disability (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) Eligible for Eligible for Not Eligible
B.A.M.S./B B.A.M.S./B.S.M. for
.S.M.S./B.
S./B.U.M.S./B.H Programm
U.M.S./B.H
.M.S. e
.M.S
Programme,
Programm
Eligible for PwD
e, Not
Eligible for Quota
PwD
Quota
1. Physical (A) (a) Leprosy Less than 40-80% disability More than
Disability Locomotor cured person* 40% Persons with 80%
Disability, (b) Cerebral disability more than 80%
including Palsy** disability may
Specified also be allowed
(c) Dwarfism
Disabilities on case to case
(d) Muscular
(a to f). basis and their
Dystrophy
function a
(e) Acid attack
incompetency
victims
65
(f) Other* will the aid of
** such as assistive
Amputation, devices, if it is
Poliomyelitis, being used, to
etc. see if its is
brought below
80% and
whether they
possess
sufficient motor
ability as
required to
pursue and
complete the
programme
satisfactorily.
* Attention should be paid to loss of sensations in fingers
and hands, amputation, as well as involvement of eyes
and corresponding recommendations be looked at.
** Attention should be paid to impairment of vision,
hearing, cognitive function etc. and corresponding
recommendations be looked at.
*** Both hands intact, with intact sensations, sufficient
strength and range of motion are essential to be
considered eligible for
B.A.M.S./B.S.M.S./B.U.M.S./B.H.M.S. programme.
(B) Visual (a) Blindness Less than Equal to or
Impairment
40% More than
(*)
disability 40%
(b) Low vision
(i.e. Disability
Category ‘0 (i.e.
(10%)’ I Category
(20%)’ III and
& II (30%) above)
(C) Hearing (a) Deaf Less than Equal to or
Impairment 40% more than
(b) Hard of
@ Disability 40%
hearing
Disability
(*) Persons with Visual impairment/ visual disability of more
than 40% may be made eligible to pursue Graduate
B.A.M.S./B.S.M.S./B.U.M.S./B.H.M.S. Education and may
be given reservation, subject to the condition that the visual
66
disability is brought to a level of less than the bench mark of
40% with advanced low vision aids such as telescopes /
magnifier etc.
@ Persons with hearing disability of more than 40% may e
made eligible to pursue Graduate
B.A.M.S./B.S.M.S./B.U.M.S./B.H.M.S. Education and may
be given reservation, subject to the condition that the
hearing disability is brought to a level of less than the bench
mark of 40% with the aid of assistive devices.
In addition to this, the individual should have a speech
discrimination score of more than 60%.
(D) Speech Organic/ Less than Equal to or
& neurological 40% more than
language causes Disability 40%
disability Disability
It is proposed that for admission to
B.A.M.S./B.S.M.S./B.U.M.S./B.H.M.S. programme the Speech
Intelligibility Affected (SIA) score shall not exceed 3 (Which will
correspond to less than 40%) to be eligible to pursue the
B.A.M.S./B.S.M.S./B.U.M.S./B.H.M.S. programme. The individuals
beyond this score will not be eligible for admission to the
B.A.M.S./B.S.M.S./B.U.M.S./B.H.M.S. programme.
Persons with an Aphasia Quotient (AQ) up to 40% may be eligible to
pursue B.A.M.S./B.S.M.S./B.U.M.S./B.H.M.S. programme but beyond
that they will neither be eligible to pursue the
B.A.M.S./B.S.M.S./B.U.M.S./B.H.M.S. programme nor will they have
any reservation.
2. Intellectual (a) Specific # currently there is no Quantification
disability learning scale available to assess the severity of
disabilities SpLD, therefore the cut-off of 40% is
(Perceptual arbitrary and more evidence is needed.
disabilities,
Less than Equal to or
Dyslexia,
40% more than 40%
Dyscalculia,
disability But
Disability
Dyspraxia & selection will be
Developmental based on the
aphasia)# learning
competency
evaluated with
the help of the
remediation /
assisted
technology /
aids /
67 infrast ructural
changes by
the Expert
Panel.
(b) Autism Absence Currently not Equal to or
spectrum o recommended more than
disorders r Mild due to lack of 60%
Disability, objective method disability
Asperser to establish or
syndrome presence and presence
(disability extent of mental of cognitive
of 40-60% illness. /intellectual
a However, the disability
s benefit of and or if
per ISAA) reservation/quot the person
where the a may be is deemed
individual considered in unfit for
is deemed future after pursuing
fit for developing B.A.M.S./
B.A.M.S./ better methods B.S.M.S./
B.S.M.S./ of disability B.U.M.S./
B.U.M.S./ assessment. B.H.M.S
B.H.M.S. programme
programm by an
e by an expert
expert panel.
panel
3. Mental Mental illness Absence Currently not Equal to or
Behaviour or mild recommended more than
40%
Disability: due to lack of
disability
less than objective
or if the
40% method to
person is
(under establish
deemed
IDEAS) presence and unfit to
extent of mental perform
illness. hi/her
duties.
However, the
Standards
benefit of
may be
reservation/quot
drafted for
a may be the definite
considered in of “fitness
future after to practice
medicine”
developing
as are
better methods
used by
of disability
several
assessment.
institutions
of countries
other than
India.
68
4. Disability (a) Chronic (i) Multiple Less than 40%80% More than
caused Neurological Sclerosis 40% disability 80%
due to Conditions Disability
(ii) Parkinsonism
(b) (i) Haemophilia Less than 40%80% More than
Blood 40% disability 80%
Disorder Disability
(ii) Thalassemia
s
(iii) sickle cell
disease
5. Multiple More than one Must consider all above while deciding in
disabilities of the above
individual cases recommendations with
including specified
respect to presence any of the above,
deaf disabilities
blindness namely, visual, Hearing, Speech &
Language disability, Intellectual Disability,
and Mental Illness as a component of
Multiple Disability.
Combining formula as notified by the
related Gazette Notification issued by the
Government. of India
a+b (90-a)
90
(where a=higher value of disability % and
b=lower value of disability % as calculated
for different disabilities) Is recommended
for computing the disability arising when
more than one disabling condition is
present in a given individual. This formula
may be used in cases with multiple
disabilities, and recommendations
regarding admission and/or reservation
made as per the specific disabilities
present in a given individual
Note:
For selection under PwD category, candidates will be required to produce Disability Certificate
before their schedule date of counselling from one of the disability assessment boards as
69
designated by concerned Authority of Government of India.
• Conclusion: He/She is Eligible/Not Eligible for admission in Indian Medicine
courses as per the CCIM Gazette Notification subject to his being otherwise
medically fit.
• Functional competency with the aid of Assistive devices in case of
Locomotor*/Visual*/Hearing* Impairment, if any
Sign. & Name Sign. & Name Sign. & Name
(Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist)
Note:
1. The selected candidates have to undergo a second medical examination by a medical board
constituted for the purpose by the Director of Medical Education to ascertain and confirm the
nature and extent of physically disability.
2. The decision of the Commissioner of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy in this regard will be final.
70
Annexure VIII (a)
First Graduate Tuition Fee Concession Certificate G.O.Ms.No. 85,
Higher Education (J2) Dept., dt: 16-04-2010)
CERTIFICATE
It is certified that there is no Graduate in the family of Selvan/ Selvi.
S/o. / D/o Thiru. presently
residing at ____________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________ And who has
applied for Professional Course during the year 2019, is eligible only for tuition fees
exemption as per the G.O.Ms.No. 85, Higher Education (J2) Dept., dt: 16-04-2010.
S.No Name Relationship Age Educational Whether
Father / Mother / Brother qualification Degree holder
/ Sister/ Grand Father /
Grand mother
1
2
3
4
5
6
Station:
Date: Head Quarters Deputy
Tahsildar Taluk:
District:
71
Annexure VIII (b)
FIRST GRADUATION CONCESSION JOINT DECLARATION FORM
(G.O.Ms.No. 85, Higher Education (J2) Dept., dt: 16-04-2010)
I hereby declare that the details of my family members and their educational qualification to
avail the tuition fee waiver for my studies in professional courses under the scheme of
waiver of only tuition fees to the students from a family in which there are no Graduates
S.No Name Relationshi Age Educational Whether
p qualification Degree holder
Father / Mother /
Brother / Sister/ Grand
Father / Grand mother
1
2
3
4
5
6
I hereby solemnly and sincerely affirm that I am the first and only person from my
family to claim the waiver of only tuition fees for the entire professional course of study and
there is no graduate in my family so far. The particulars furnished above are true. Should it,
however, be found that any information furnished therein is false in material particulars on
verification at later stage, I am liable for criminal prosecution and I also agree, to return
amount equal to 3 times the tuition fee waiver availed by me.
Date :
Place: SIGNATURE OF THE CANDIDATE
I solemnly and sincerely affirm that I am fully aware of the above declaration and the
particulars furnished in the declaration are correct. I am liable for the criminal action /
recovery of amount equal to 3 times of the fees waived, for incorrect particulars furnished.
Date :
Place: SIGNATURE OF THE PARENT/ GUARDIAN
72
Annexure - IX
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE FOR ADMINISTRATION OF HEPATITIS-B VACCINATION
I, Dr………………………………. Registration No… .................. certify that I have this
day……………. Of …………… 2025 administered the Hepatitis-B Vaccine to the
candidate whose particulars are given below:
1. Name of the Candidate
2. Father’s Name
3. Sex
4. Age
5. Identification marks:
I.
II.
6. DOSE I / II / III
Signature of the Applicant Signature of Medical Officer
Name and Designation
Place:
Date: Office Seal
62
Annexure - X
INCOME CERTIFICATE
(This Certificate should be issued by an Officer of Revenue Department not below the
rank of Tahsildar in the Taluk concerned.)
Name of the Applicant ……………………………. Application No ………………………..
This is to certify that Annual income of Thiru/Thirumathi
…………………………………… (Parent Name) Parent/Guardian*
of Thiru/Selvi/Thirumathi
…………………………………… (Applicant Name) an applicant for admission to
BSMS/BAMS /BUMS/BHMS course in Government / Self-financing Colleges in Tamil
Nadu residing at ……………………………………………………………………………….
is Rs…………… (Rupees ........................................................................................ only)
Date : Signature:
Station: Name and Designation:
Office Seal:
Note: *Applicable only when both parents are deceased
1. This Certificate should not be issued by Special Tahsildars. Deputy Tahsildars such
as Loans, Land acquisition. Election, Excise and HQs. Deputy Tahsildars, Special
Deputy Collectors, Asst. Commissioner of Agricultural income, Excise and Elections
etc.,
2. Candidates of SC/SCA/ST whose parents’ annual income is less than Rs.2.5 lakhs
and claiming the fee concession for admission to Government Medical Colleges and
Government Quota in Self Financing Medical Colleges should produce the above
valid Income Certificate (As per G.O.(Ms) No.51 AD and TW Department, dated 07-
08-2013 in Original at the time of Counselling Compulsorily.
63
Annexure - XI
BONAFIDE CERTIFICATE
[See the Tamil Nadu Admission to Undergraduate Courses in Medicine, Dentistry, Indian
Medicine and Homeopathy on preferential basis to students of Government schools Act,
2020 (Tamil Nadu Act No.34 of 2020)]
This is to certify that Selvan/Selvi. .................................................................. S/o/D/o
…………………………………, residing at ………………..…………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………..
(address) has studied from ………………… Standard to …………… Standard from
the academic year ……………. to ……………… in the
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………… (Name and address of Government school).
Type of School Government Corporation
Name of the
schools, Municipal schools, Adi Dravidar
Sl. Year of
Class Government
and Tribal Welfare schools, Kallar
No. Study
School
Reclamation schools, Forest
Department schools and other schools
I declare that the above information furnished by me is true.
Signature of the Candidate.
Verified the above information in respect of the School last studied with the records and
found correct.
Seal and Signature of the Headmaster / Headmistress.
Name :
Verified with report obtained from the Head Master / Head Mistress of all the above
mentioned Schools and found them to be correct.
Seal and Signature of the Chief Educational Officer.
Name:
64
Note:
1. As per section 2 of the said Act, “Government” means the State Government, and “
Government schools” mean and includes Government schools, Corporation schools,
Municipal schools, Adi Dravidar and Tribal Welfare schools, Kallar Reclamation
schools, Forest Department schools and other schools managed by Government
Departments.
th
2. Chief Educational Officer of the District in which the student studied 12 Class has to
get the credentials verified in case the applicant has studied in more than one School /
more than one District.
65
Annexure - XII
AGREEMENT BOND FORM FOR CANDIDATES ADMITTED FOR B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S.
B.U.M.S/ B.H.M.S. COURSES FOR 2025-2026 ACADEMIC YEAR
This agreement made this ..................... day of ............................... month of 2025 between
with Governor of Tamil Nadu (hereinafter called the Governor with expression shall, where
the context so admits include his successor in office) of one part and
....................................
son/daughter of .......................................... resident of ………………. in the
....................................... Taluk of… ............................................. District (hereinafter called
the candidates) which expression shall, where the context so admits include his/her heirs,
executors, administrators and representatives of the other part.
WHEREAS the candidate has, on his/her application been selected to undergo training for
the B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S. /B.U.M.S/ B.H.M.S. course in the Self Financing Medical College
under Management Quota Seat (hereinafter referred to as the said college).
AND WHEREAS the candidate has agreed to complete his / her training for the said
course, at the said college subject to the conditions hereinafter appearing.
Now THEREFORE, this agreement witnesses and it is hereby agreed as follows:
1. The Candidate shall diligently complete his/her training for the said course at the
said college, shall abide by the rules of the said colleges for the time being in force
regulating the conduct of students at the said college and shall pass all the
examinations prescribed for the said course by the University or the Medical
Institution concerned.
2. Upon passing the final B.S.M.S./ B.A.M.S./ B.H.M.S. Examination the candidate
shall serve as “Intern” for the prescribed period as laid down by Indian Medicine
Central Council Act (Central Act of 1979).
3. (i) The candidate shall on demand made by the Government within two years from
the date on which he/she registers himself/herself as a Medical Practitioner,
serve for a period of not less than five years and in such rural areas as the
Government by general or special orders specify.
(ii) Those candidates who fail to comply with clause 3 (i) shall have to pay a sum
of Rs. 3,00,000/- (Rupees Three Lakhs only) or as the Government may direct
as penalty for having breach the contract in the bond.
66
4. During the period of Internship under clause (2) and while in service under clause
(3) the candidate shall faithfully, diligently and with skill and ability perform his/her
duties and observe the rules for the time being inforce made by the Governor or the
President as the case may be for regulating the conduct of Government Servants.
5. While in service under clause (3) the Pay and allowance and other conditions of
service of the candidate shall be regulated by the rules and orders of the
Government for the time being inforce, for the posts to which he/she is appointed.
6. Candidates who discontinue the course on or after the last cut off date for
admission process for the academic session 2025-2026 and on any date of the
subsequent years are bound by the bond and thereby they shall have to pay a sum
of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only) as penalty for having breached the
contract in the bond by means of Demand Draft in favour of “The Director of Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai-106” payable at Chennai.
7. Any sum falling due from the candidate under this agreement shall be recovered
from him/her as an arrear of land revenue.
8. If any dispute shall arise between the parties hereto in respect of this agreement or
any of the provisions herein contained or anything arising hereunto except in respect
of matters on which the decisions of the Government under clause (6) is declared
to be final and binding, the same shall be referred to the arbitration of Director of
Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy whose decision thereon shall be final and
binding on the parties.
9. The witness shall bear the stamp duty payable in respect of this agreement if
required. In witness whereof the parties here to have appended their signature
hereunto on the dates respectively mentioned against the signature.
Signature of the Candidate and Date
Witnesses: Signature of the Parent/Guardian and full
addres
1.
2. Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
for and on behalf of the Governor.
67
To
The Governor of Tamil Nadu
Whereas the Governor has, in order to secure due performance of the above agreement,
demanded security from the candidates.
Now, therefore, in consideration of the admission of the candidate to the said college and
his/her continuance there, for training as aforesaid and at the request of the candidate.
(i). .................................................... Son /Daughter of.............................................
...................................................... Resident of.......................................................
……………………………………………………………………………………………..
Taluk of ............................................. in the District of .........................................
(ii). .................................................... Son /Daughter of.............................................
...................................................... Resident of.......................................................
……………………………………………………………………………………………..
Taluk of ............................................. in the District of .........................................
(iii). .................................................... Son /Daughter of.............................................
...................................................... Resident of.......................................................
……………………………………………………………………………………………..
Taluk of ............................................. in the District of .........................................
hereinafter called ‘The Sureties’ on behalf of the candidate do hereby jointly and
severally agree that in the event of the candidate committing any breach of any
term of the above agreement to which breach the decision of the Government
shall be final and binding on the sureties we shall pay to the Government on
demand and without the demur sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only) or
as the Government may direct and we hereby bind ourselves and representatives
for such payment. We further agree that any sum due hereunder shall be
recovered as an arrear of land revenue.
We also agree that notwithstanding the provisions of sections 133 and 135 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872 (Central Act IX of 1872) or any other rule of law or
equity in that behalf any indulgence of forbearance shown by the Government to
the candidate or any variance in the terms of the contract with the candidate
whether with or without the consent of the sureties or either of this shall not
operate as a discharge of the sureties obligation under this bond.
Signed by us this .......................................... day of .......................... 2025-2026.
68
Witness:
1. Signature of First Surety / Parent or
Guardian of Candidate Full address
......................................................................
......................................................................
......................................................................
2. Signature of Second Surety and Full Address
.......................................................................
.......................................................................
.......................................................................
3. Signature of Third Surety and Full Address
…....................................................................
.........................................................................
…………………………………………………...
69
Annexure- XIII
Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent/Guardian
(This should not be enclosed with the application but should be submitted only at
the time of admission)
I/WE do hereby solemnly and sincerely affirm
1. That the statements made and information furnished in the application submitted and
also in all the enclosures there to submitted by him/her are true. Should it however be
found that any information furnished therein is untrue in material particulars, I/We
realize that he/she is liable for criminal prosecution and forfeiture of his / her seat in the
Institution allotted during the counselling.
2. That my son/daughter/ward would conform strictly to all the rules and regulations
prescribed by the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai in force now or
which may be introduced in the Institution hereafter and that I/We realize that breach
of discipline and rules on my son’s/daughter’s/ ward’s part would entail forfeiture of
his/her seat in the Institution.
3. That my son/daughter/ward shall not make any claim for admission to a particular
college as a matter of right during allotment/Re-allotment.
4. That my son/daughter/ward agrees to pay any amount that may be become due as and
when the fee structure is revised as may be decided by Government of Tamil Nadu
/Committee appointed by the Government for the purpose.
5. That my son/daughter/ward do hereby agree to conform to follow the rules and
regulations including those relating to the hostel laid down or to be laid down by the
Dean of the Institution for due maintenance of discipline at the said college and assure
that he/she will not join any agitation /strike of any kind during course of study and
further agree to make good when called upon to do so to the Government of Tamil
Nadu any damage to furniture, apparatus or other articles which may be caused by
any carelessness negligence and want only on his/her part.
6. That my son/daughter/ward who is a Native of Tamil Nadu and will not claim dual
Nativity in future.
70
7. That my son/daughter/ward hereby declare that he/she belongs to …………….
Community (Sub caste .................................. ) and is fully aware the producing a false
Community certificate leads to expulsion from any course of study at any time besides
initiation of criminal action against him/her as per law.
8. That we are fully aware, as per the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
and Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Ragging Act,1997, Ragging is an offence, and is
banned in the Institution and anyone indulging in ragging is liable to be punished by
expulsion from the Institution and /or rigorous imprisonment up to 3 years, and /or fine
up to Rs.25,000/-
Signature of Candidate
Signature of the Parent/Guardian
Place:
Date:
71
Annexure – XIV- A
UNDERTAKING REGARDING AUTHORISATION
I,………………………………………………………………………………………………
…… Son / daughter of Thiru ................................................................................... aged
……………………… years AR number ………………………….. and General Rank
……………………… in the Rank list for B.S.M.S /B.A.M.S/B.H.M.S/B.U.M.S 2025 -2026
session do hereby solemnly affirm and undertake that the decision of my authorized
representative, Thiru / Tmt / Selvi…………………………………………………..…………
Son / Daughter / W ife of ……………………………………. Thiru ………………………
aged ………….years, regarding selection / rejection of seat on the date of counseling
(……………..) shall be binding on me and I shall not have any claim whatsoever, other
than the decision taken by my authorized representative on my behalf
on……………………………………………
Signature of the Candidate
Name…………………………………… AR No……………………….
Address………………………………... General Rank…………………
72
Annexure – XIV-B
AUTHORISATION LETTER
I,………………………………………………………………………. son / daughter of
Thiru …………………………………………………………... bearing A R number
………………………….. and General Rank ……………….. in the Rank list for B.S.M.S
/B.A.M.S/B.H.M.S/B.U.M.S Course 2025 - 2026 session do hereby authorize, Thiru
/ Tmt/ Selvi…………………………….………. Son / Daughter
of…………………………………… Thiru ……………………………… to represent me
on…………………………………….. before the Selection Committee, Directorate of
Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy, Chennai for allotment of a seat in B.S.M.S. / B.A.M.S.
/B.H.M.S. /B.U.M.S courses 2025 - 2026 session .
The signature and the photograph of the above named Thiru / Tmt / Selvi
……………………………………………. are attested below.
Photograph of Candidate Name:
Signature of the Candidate: Application Number:
General Rank in the
Rank List:
Photograph of authorized Signature of authorized
Representative attested by Representative duly
the candidate the candidate attested by
73
Annexure – XV
FAQ’S REGARDING COUNSELLING PROCESS
Q.No.1: How to apply for AUSH UG Medical Degree Courses admission in Tamil Nadu?
Ans: After the NEET-UG 2025 results are out, there will be notification in the websites
www.tnayushselection.org, www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in for application to AUSH UG
Medical Degree Courses admission in Tamil Nadu. Candidates are advised to
Register them to create User Name and Password after that login using their User
Name and Password. Candidates are advised to read this prospectus carefully and
apply through the website in Online mode only.
Note: Cost of applying online: Rs.500/- (SC/SCA/ST candidates are exempted)
Q.No. 2: I have applied online. Is this enough for getting a seat?
Ans: No. Applying online is just the first stage in the entire process. Once all the
applications are received and scrutinized Eligible Merit List of Candidates
(Candidates who have applied and are found eligible) will be published in the
websites. After this Candidates have to register for the counselling process as
mentioned in the scheme of counselling.
Q. No. 3: How do I register for the counselling?
Ans.: After the Merit List is published candidates have to register before the onset of
counselling by paying the non-refundable online Processing Fee of Rs.500/- in the
website after logging in using the same credentials (User Name, Password) used
during the application process. Registration is allowed before Round 1, Round 3 and
Stray Round and Fresh registration is not allowed before Round 2 (as this is a re-
allotment Round)
Note: Counselling Registration is allowed only for already applied candidates who
are in the Eligible Merit list and not for those candidates who have not at all applied
to AUSH UG Medical Degree Course.
Q. No. 4: How and when I had to make the payment?
Ans: After completion of Choice filling, payment page appears automatically. Candidate
can do online payment by Net Banking / Credit card/ Debit card. Only after the
successful payment, candidate can submit their choice filling.
74
Q. No. 5: Is there any restriction for filling up number of choices of Institution (College) in
choice filling form?
Ans: No, you can give as many choices as you wish during online choice filling. However,
choices should be in order of your preference. There will be a common software for
Government Quota / Government Surrendered seats for filling up of choices. The
choices will be available based on your eligibility and application.
Q. No.6: Is it necessary to fill up the choices and lock the choices to get seat allotted? Or I
will be allotted seat automatically from leftover seats?
Ans: After online registration (registration is compulsory to take part in online allotment
process, before the counselling Rounds during specified registration period), you
have to fill in choice of Institution/college/course in order of your preference. Once
choice is filled in, it can be modified before locking it. If candidate does not lock the
choice submitted by him/her, the choices already filled will be automatically locked as
per counselling schedule.
Note: If the candidate does not fill choices for any college, will not be allotted any
seat during the counselling
IMPORTANT:
Don’t wait till the last minute to Register and Lock your choices. Please go through
your submitted choices before locking, as once you lock the choices they cannot be
modified or changed even if you have made a mistake. It may result in allotment of a
seat which you never wanted. (Please note that the choices once locked cannot be
unlocked even by the Selection Committee)
Q. No. 7: Is it necessary to join allotted College of Round 1 to get chance to participate in
Round 2?
Ans: No, candidates need not report or join the allotted college of Round 1 since there is
free exit.
However, if they want to retain the Round 1 seat and upgrade in Round 2 they have
to physically join the college of Round 1 and participate in Round 2 online.
75
Q. No. 8: Can a candidate participate in Round 2 without submitting fresh choices (based
on choices submitted before Round-1)?
Ans: Fresh choice submission by eligible candidates, as mentioned above is necessary
for consideration for seat allotment during any Round. If candidate does not submit
fresh choice(s) during choice filling period, the candidate will not be considered for
allotment of seat during Round- 2 and will retain the already joined seat, if any
Q. No.9: If I opt to participate in Round 2 of counselling whether my allotted seat
(of Round 1) will be cancelled?
Ans: In case you are not allotted any seat in the Round 2, you will retain earlier allotted
seat in Round 1 if you had joined already. However, on re-allotment of a seat in
Round 2, the earlier allotted seat in Round 1 will automatically be cancelled and
allotted to another candidate. Therefore, you are advised to fill in only choices which
you prefer over the earlier allotted seat, for Round 2.
Q. No. 10: - What is the procedure for Round 3 Counselling which will be conducted by
Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee for AUSH Medical Degree Courses?
Ans. Since reallotment is allowed in Round-3, The net vacant seats due to Not allotted /
non joining, non-reporting of Round 2 and any converted seats due to lack of
candidates in the particular quota and the virtual vacancies will be published in the
seat matrix and eligible candidates have to submit fresh choices and the result will
be processed as per Choice & Merit applying the rule of Reservation.
Q. No. 11: How much time will I be given to join the allotted college?
Ans: Candidates allotted seats will be required to join the allotted college/course within the
stipulated time which is mentioned in counselling schedule. However, candidates are
advised to join as early as possible and not to wait for last day of joining, due to
different schedule of holiday (including local holidays) / working hours in various ISM
Medical Colleges. Therefore, candidates are advised to contact allotted college
immediately after declaration of result of counselling allotment process, to know the
details. If candidate fails to join the allotted College within stipulated time, then the
allotted seat will be cancelled. For Round 3 and Stray Round as there is very little
time for the entire counselling process and there is no process of
76
reallotment/resignation, downloading of allotment order after payment of Tuition Fees
will be considered as Joined. But the candidate has to report to the allotted college
within the stipulated time. If the candidate does not report candidates will be treated
as Discontinued and his seat will be considered vacant and candidates will forfeit the
advance Tuition Fees.
Please note that under no circumstances date of joining/date of reporting can be
extended by the Selection Committee.
Q. No. 12: What documents are required at the time of Joining/ Reporting to allotted
College?
Ans: The following original documents (along with attested photocopies) are required at
the time of joining/reporting to the allotted college:
i. Class X Mark Sheet
ii. Class XI Mark Sheet
iii. H.S.C. Mark sheet or any other equivalent examination.
iv. Transfer certificate obtained after the completion of H.S.C / equivalent examination or
any other courses.
v. Certificate for proof of study from VI Std. to XII Std for the candidates who have studied
completely in Tamil Nadu.
vi. Community Certificate
vii. Nativity certificate.
viii. Eligibility Certificate (if applicable)
ix. Migration certificate (if applicable)
x. Special Category Certificate (if applicable)
Q. No. 13: In case candidate had to apply for both Govt. Quota in SF Colleges and for
management quota should the candidate pay the fee for both?
Ans. Yes. As per the policy, the candidate has to pay both the fees. In this case the
candidate will have to pay fee for GQ in SF Colleges. Rs.10,000/- plus for MQ
Rs.25,000/- as Advance Tuition Fee in addition to the Online Processing Fee
Rs.500/- for GQ and Rs.1000/- for MQ.
77
Q. No.14: Will the Selection Committee bear the bank charges incurred by the candidate
while registering for counselling?
Ans: No. Bank Charges if any, incurred by the candidate should be borne by the
candidate only.
Q. No.15: Will the Selection Committee pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition
Fee?
Ans: No. The Selection Committee will not pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition
Fee.
Q. No. 16: If I forget my password that I have created during the process of registration,
how to retrieve it?
Ans: To retrieve the forgotten password, system facilitates the following process:
The candidate is required to enter the information that candidates filled at the time of
registration and then security question & answer thereon to be entered as given
during New Candidate registration process. The above data submitted by candidate
will be validated with the registered candidate’s database. If the above entries match,
then only the candidate would be permitted to enter new password to proceed
further.
IMPORTANT:
Please keep the information same as that you have furnished on the application form
confidential, and do not share the password and OTP with anybody as to register for
online allotment process and submit choice you need that information. If somebody
else uses that information, candidates can misuse your online registration and
prevent you from taking part in online allotment process. Keep print out of application
form ready for reference with you.
78
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURES Name
Annexure - I Special categories with their Code Numbers
Annexure -, II List of Government Medical Colleges
Annexure - III List of Self-financing Medical Colleges
Annexure – IV Certificate of Nativity of Tamil Nadu
Annexure - V Certificate of Department of Ex-Servicemen’s Welfare
Annexure - VI Details of selection of Candidates under Quota for Eminent Sports
Persons
Annexure – VI (A) Declaration of the Candidate for Sports Quota
Annexure - VII Certificate of Disability
Annexure – VIII (a) First Graduate Tuition Fee Concession Certificate
Annexure – VIII (b) First Graduate Concession Joint Declaration form
Annexure - IX Medical Certificate for Administration of Hepatitis-B vaccination
Annexure - X Income Certificate
Annexure - XI Bonafide certificate
Annexure – XII Agreement bond
Annexure – XIII Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent / Guardian
Annexure - XIV - A Undertaking regarding authorization
Annexure – XIV-B Authorization letter
Annexure - XV Faq’s regarding counselling process
Annexure - XVI Check List
79
LIST OF COMMUNITIES
2025-2026
LIST SHOWING THE SCHEDULED
CASTES,
SCHEDULED TRIBES, BACKWARD
CLASSES, BACKWARD CLASS-
MUSLIMS,
MOST BACKWARD CLASSES
AND
DENOTIFIED
COMMUNITIES IN THE
STATE OF TAMILNADU
LIST OF COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE OF TAMILNADU
LISTOF BACKWARD CLASSES, MOST BACKWARD
CLASSES, DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES THROUGH OUT THE
STATE OF TAMIL NADU UNLESS AND OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
1. G.O.Ms.No.85 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 29.7.2008
2. G.O.Ms.No.96, Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 8.9.2008
3. G.O.Ms.No.97 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 11.9.2008
4. G.O.Ms.No.37 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 21.5.2009
5. G.O.Ms.No.98 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 5.1.2009.
80
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASSES
Sl.No Name of the Caste
1. Agamudayar including Thozhu or Thuluva Vellala
2. AgaramVellan Chettiar
3. Alwar, Azhavar and Alavar(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli
District.)
4. Servai (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Pudukottai Districts.)
5. Nulayar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
6. Archakarai Vellala
7. Aryavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
8. Ayira Vaisyar
9. Badagar
10. Billava
11. Bondil
12. Boyas (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem,
Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts).
PeddaBoyar (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
Oddars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai,Theni and Dindigul Districts)
Kaloddars (except Kancheepuram, Chegalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukkottai, Tiruchirappalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
Nellorepet oddars (except Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
Sooramari oddars (except Salem and Namakkal Districts)
13 Chakkala (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts)
14. Chavalakarar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
15. Chettuor Chetty (including Kottar Chetty, ElurChetty, Pathira Chetty, Valayal Chetty,
Pudukadai Chetty)(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
16. Chowdry
16(A) Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Castes irrespective of the generation of conversion
(except the Paravar conversion to Christianity of Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk
of Tenkasi District) for the purpose of reservation of seats in Educational Institutions and for
seats in Public Services.
16(B). C.S.I formerly S.I.U.C (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
81
17. Donga Dasaris (except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts.
18. Devangar,Sedar
19. Dombs (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
Dommars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Thiruvannamalai Districts)
20. Enadi
21. Ezhavathy (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
22. Ezhuthachar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
23. Ezhuva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
24. Gangavar
25. Gavara, Gavarai and Vadugar (Vaduvar) (other than Kamma, Kapu, Balija and Reddi)
26. Gounder
27. Gowda (including Gammala, Kalali and Anuppa Gounder)
28. Hegde
29. Idiga
30. Illathu Pillaimar, Illuvar, Ezhuvar and Illathar
31. Jhetty
32. Jogis (Except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
33. Kabbera
34 Kaikolar, Sengunthar
35. Kaladi(exceptSivaganga,Virudhunagar,Ramanathapuram,Madurai,Theni,
Dindigul,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
36. Kalari Kurup including Kalari Panicker (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk
of Tenkasi District)
37. Kalingi
38. Kallar, Easanattu Kallar , Gandharva Kottai Kallars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Tiruvarur, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts).
Kootappal Kallars (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur
Districts)
Piramalai Kallars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur Districts)
Periyasooriyur Kallars (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
82
39. Kallar Kula Thondaman
40. Kalveli Gounder
41. Kambar
42. Kammalar or Viswakarma, Viswakarmala (including Thattar, Porkollar, Kannar, Karumar,
Kollar, Thacher, Kal Thacher, Kamsala and Viswa brahmin.)
43. Kani, Kanisu, Kaniyar Panicker
44. Kaniyala Vellalar
45. Kannada Saineegar, Kannadiyar (Throughout the State) and Dasapalanjika (Coimbatore,
Erode, Tiruppur and the Nilgiris Districts)
46. Kannadiya Naidu
47. Karpoora Chettiar
48. Karuneegar (Seer Karuneegar, Sri Karuneegar, Sarattu Karuneegar, Kaikatti Karuneegar,
Mathuvazhi Kanakkar, Sozhi Kanakkar and Sunnambu Karuneegar)
49. Kasukkara Chettiar
50. Katesar, Pattamkatti
51. Kavuthiyar
52. Kerala Mudali
53. Kharvi
54. Khatri
55. Kongu Vaishnava
56. Kongu Vellalars( including Vellala Gounder, Nattu Gounder, Narambukkatti Gounder,
Tirumudi Vellalar, Thondu Vellalar, Pala Gounder, Poosari Gounder, Anuppa Vellala
Gounder, Padaithalai Gounder, Chendalai Gounder, Pavalankatti Vellala Gounder,
Palavellala Gounder, Sanku Vellala Gounder and Rathinagiri Gounder).
57. Koppala Velama
58. Koteyar
59. Krishnavaka (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
60. Kudikara Vellalar
61. Kudumbi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
62. Kuga Vellalar
63. Kunchidigar
63(A) Latin Catholics except Latin Catholic Vannar in Kanniyakumari District.
63(B) Lathin Catholics in Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
64. Lambadi
65. Lingayat (Jangama)
83
66. Mahratta (Non-Brahmin)(including Namdev Mahratta)
67. Malayar
68. Male
69. Maniagar
70. Maravars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinum , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
71. RMaomonadnrautmhaapnudraaim E,n Sbiavtahguannaglua ,( 8V4ir)u Udrh.uSnoazghaiar , VTeirlulanlaerl veli and Toothukudi Districts)
72. KMaoroupmpaanra vars, Appanad Kondayam kottai Maravar (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar,
73. RMaumthaunraajtah,a Mpuurtahmiriy, aMra, dMuurtatiir,i yTahre, nMi uatnhda rDaiinydarig ul Districts.)
74. SNeamdabra, nSahda nMaarr aanvadr Gs r(aemxcaenpi t inScivluadgianngg Cah, rVisirtuiadnh uNnaadgaar,r ,C ahnrdis tRiaanm Sahnaanthaar paunrda mC hDriissttiraicnt s)
Gramani.
75. Nagaram
76. Naikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
77. Nangudi Vellalar
78. Nanjil Mudali (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
79. Odar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
80. Odiya
81. Oottruvalanattu Vellalar
82. O.P.S.Vellalar
83. Ovachar
84. Paiyur Kotta Vellalar
85. Pamulu
86. Panar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
community is a Scheduled Caste)
86A Pandiya Vellalar
87 -Omitted-
88. Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District
89. Pannirandam Chettiar or Uthama Chettiar
90. Parkavakulam (including Surithimar, Nathamar, Malayamar, Moopanar and Nainar)
91. Perike (including Perike Balija)
92. Perumkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
93. Podikara Vellalar
94. Pooluva Gounder
95. Poraya
96. Pulavar (in Coimbatore and Tiruppur Districts)
97. Pulluvar or Pooluvar
98. Pusala
84
99. Reddy (Ganjam)
100. Sadhu Chetty (including Telugu Chetty, Twenty four Manai Telungu Chetty)
101. Sakkaravar or Kavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District )
102. Salivagana
103. Saliyar, Padmasaliyar, Pattusaliyar, Pattariyar and Adhaviyar
104. Savalakkarar
105. Senaithalaivar, Senaikudiyar and Illaivaniar
105A Serakula Vellalar
106. Sourashtra (Patnulkarar)
107. Sozhiavellalar (including Sozha Vellalar, Vetrilaikarar, Kodikalkarar and Keeraikarar)
108. Srisayar
109. Sundaram Chetty
109A Thiyya
110. Thogatta Veerakshatriya
111. Tholkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
112. Tholuva Naicker and Vetalakara Naicker
113 -Omitted-
114. Thoriyar
115. Ukkirakula Kshatriya Naicker
116. Uppara, Uppillia and Sagara
117. Urali Gounder ( except Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
District) and Orudaya Gounder or Oorudaya Gounder (in Madurai ,Theni, Dindigul,
Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai,
Salem and Namakkal Districts )
118. Urikkara Nayakkar
118A Virakodi Vellala
119 Vallambar
119.A Vallanattu Chettiar
120. Valmiki
121. Vaniyar, Vania Chettiar (including Gandla, Ganika, Telikula and Chekkalar)
122. Veduvar and Vedar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
123. Veerasaiva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
124. Velar
125. Vellan Chettiar
85
126. Veluthodathu Nair (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
Vokkaligar (including Vakkaligar, Okkaligar, Kappiliyar, Kappiliya, Okkaliga Gowda, Okkaliya-
127.
Gowder, Okkaliya Gowda )
128. Wynad Chetty (The Nilgiris District)
Yadhava (including Idaiyar, Telugu Speaking Idaiyar known as Vaduga Ayar or Vaduga Idaiyar
129.
or Golla and Asthanthra Golla)
130. Yavana
131. Yerukula
Converts to Christianity from any Hindu Backward Classes Community or Most Backward
Classes Community or Denotified Communities (except the Converts to Christianity from
131A
Meenavar, Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar, Mukkuvar or Mukayar and
Paravar)
Orphans and destitute children who have lost their parents before reaching the age of ten and
are destitutes; and who have nobody else to take care of them either by law or custom; and
132. also who are admitted into any of the schools or orphanages run by the Government or
recognized by the Government.
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASS MUSLIMS
1. Ansar
2. Dekkani Muslims
3. Dudekula
4. Labbais including Rowthar and Marakayar (whether their spoken language is Tamil or Urdu)
5. Mapilla
6. Sheik
7. Syed
LIST OF MOST BACKWARDS CLASSES COMMUNITIES
1 Ambalakarar
2 Andipandaram
2(A) Arayar (in Kanniyakumari District)
3 Bestha, Siviar
4 Bhatraju (other than Kshatriya Raju)
5 Boyar, Oddar
6 Dasari
7 Dommara
86
8 Eravallar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where
the community is a Scheduled Tribe )
9 Isaivellalar
10 Jambuvanodai
11 Jangam
12 Jogi
13 Kongu Chettiar (in Coimbatore and Erode Districts only)
14 Koracha
15 Kulala (including Kuyavar and Kumbarar)
16 Kunnuvar Mannadi
17 Kurumba, Kurumba Gounder
18 Kuruhini Chetty
18(A) Latin Catholic Christian Vannar (in Kanniyakumari District)
19 Maruthuvar, Navithar, Mangala, Velakattalavar, Velakatalanair and Pronopakari
20 Mond Golla
21 Moundadan Chetty
22 Mahendra, Medara
23 Mutlakampatti
24 Narikoravar (Kurivikars)
25 Nokkar
25(A) Panisaivan/Panisivan
Vanniakula Kshatriya (including Vanniyar, Vanniya, Vannia Gounder, Gounder or Kander,
26
Padayachi, Palli and Agnikula Kshatriya)
27 Paravar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
Community is a Scheduled Caste)
27A Paravar converts to Christianity including the Paravar converts to Christianity of
Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk in Tenkasi District.
28 Meenavar (Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar) (including converts to Christianity )
29 Mukkuvar or Mukayar (including converts to Christianity)
30 Punnan Vettuva Gounder
31 Pannayar (other than Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District)
32 Sathatha Srivaishnava (including Sathani, Chattadi and Chattada Srivaishnava)
33 Sozhia Chetty
34 Telugupatty Chetty
35 Thottia Naicker ( including Rajakambalam, Gollavar, Sillavar, Thockalavar , Thozhuva
Naicker and Erragollar)
87
36 Thondaman
36(A) Thoraiyar (Nilgris)
36(B) Thoraiyar (Plains)
36(C) Transgender or Eunuch (Thirunangai or Aravani)
37 Valaiyar (including Chettinad Valayars)
38 Vannar (Salavai Thozhilalar)(including Agasa, Madivala, Ekali, Rajakula, Veluthadar and
Rajaka) (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
community is a Scheduled Caste)
39 Vettaikarar
40 Vettuva Gounder
41 Yogeeswarar
LIST OF DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
1 Attur Kilnad Koravars (Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore, Villupuram, kallakurichi,
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga and Virudhunagar Districts)
2 Attur Melnad Koravars (Salem and Namakkal District)
3 Appanad Kondayamkottai Maravar (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai,
Theni and Dindigul Districts )
4 Ambalakarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
5 Ambalakkarar (Suriyanur, Tiruchirapalli District)
6 Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem, Namakkal,
Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts)
7 Battu Turkas
8 C.K.Koravars (Cuddalore, Villupuram and Kallakurichi Districts)
9 Chakkala (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Madurai,
Theni, Dindigul and the Nilgiris Districts)
10 Changyampudi Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
11 Chettinad Valayars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
12 Dombs (Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
13 Dobba Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
14 Dommars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
15 Donga Boya
88
16 Donga Ur.Korachas
17 Devagudi Talayaris
18 Dobbai Korachas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts )
19 Dabi Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts )
20 Donga Dasaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
21 Gorrela Dodda Boya
22 Gudu Dasaris
23 Gandarvakottai Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Cuddalore, Villupuram and
Kallakurichi Districts)
24 Gandarvakottai Kallars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and
Pudukottai Districts)
25 Inji Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
26 Jogis (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Chennai, Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
27 Jambavanodai
28 Kaladis (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and
Ariyalur Districts )
29 Kal Oddars (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai,
Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem
and Namakkal Districts)
30 Koravars (Kancheepuram , Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Pudukottai,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Thiravarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukadi, Chennai,
Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts )
31 Kalinji Dabikoravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai
Districts)
32 Kootappal Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
89
33 Kala Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
34 Kalavathila Boyas
35 Kepmaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur
Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts )
36 Maravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi and Toothukudi
Districts)
37 Monda Koravars
38 Monda Golla (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
39 Mutlakampatti (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalaur and Pudukottai Districts)
40 Nokkars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
41 Nellorepet Oddars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
42 Oddars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts)
43 Pedda Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
44 Ponnai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
45 Piramalai Kallars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur Districts)
46 Peria Suriyur Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalurand Pudukottai Districts)
47 Padayachi (Vellayan Kuppam in Cuddalore District and Tennore in Tiruchirapalli District )
48 Punnan Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts )
49 Servai (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
50 Salem Melnad Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur,
Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Salem, Namakkal, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
51 Salem Uppu Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
52 Sakkaraithamadai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
53 Saranga Palli Koravars
54 Sooramari Oddars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
55 Sembanad Maravars (Sivaganga, Virudunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
90
56 Thalli Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
57 Telungapatti Chetis (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
58 Thottia Naickers (Sivaganga , Virudunagar, Ramanathapuram, Kancheepuram,
Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi,
Salem, Namakkal, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet, Tiruvannamalai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
59 Thogamalai Koravars or Kepmaris (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai Districts)
60 Uppukoravars or Settipalli Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts)
61 Urali Gounders (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
62 Wayalpad or Nawalpeta Korachas
63 Vaduvarpatti Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
64 Valayars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur Pudukottai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
65 Vettaikarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts)
66 Vetta Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
67 Varaganeri Koravars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
68 Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED CASTES)
1 Adi Andhra
2 Adi Dravida
3 Adi Karnataka
4 Ajila
5 Aruthathiyar
6 Ayyanavar (in Kanyakumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
7 Baira
8 Bakuda
9 Bandi
91
10 Bellara
11 Bharata (In Kanykumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District.
12 Chakkiliyan
13 Chalavadi
14 Chamar, Muchi
15 Chandala
16 Cheruman
17 Devendrakula Velalar (Devendrakulanathan, Kadaiyan (excluding in the coastal areas of
Tirunalveli, thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Tiruvarur and
Nagapattinam district), Kalladi, Kudumban, Pallan, Pannadi, Vathiriyan)
18 Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano
19 Domban
20 Godagali
21 Godda
22 Gosangi
23 Holeya
24 Jaggali
25 Jambuvulu
26 Kadaiyan (in the districts of Tirunelveli, Thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai,
Thanjavur, Tiruvarrur and Nagapattinam)
27 Kakkalan (in kanyakumari districts and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
28 -Omitted-
29 Kanakkan, Padanna (in the Nilgiris district)
30 Karimpalan
31 Kavara (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
32 Koliyan
33 Koosa
34 Kootan, Koodan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
35 -Omitted-
36 Kuravan, Sidhanar
37 Madari
38 Madiga
39 Maila
40 Mala
41 Mannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
42 Mavilan
92
43 Mager
44 Mundala
45 Nalakeyava
46 Nayadi
47 Padannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
48 Pagadi
49 -Omitted-
50 Palluvan
51 Pambada
52 Panan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
53 Panchama
54 -Omitted-
55 Panniandi
56 Paraiyan, Parayan, Sambavar
57 Paravan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
58 Pathiyan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
59 Pulayan, Cheramar
60 Puthirai Vannan
61 Raneyar
62 Samagara
63 Samban
64 Sapari
65 Semman
66 Thandan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
67 Thoti
68 Tiruvalluvar
69 Vallon
70 Valluvan
71 Vannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
72 -Omitted-
73 Velan
74 Vetan (in Kanyakumari and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
75 Vettiyan
76 Vettuvan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah of Tirunelvelli district)
93
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED TRIBES) TAMILNADU
1. Adiyan
2. Aranadan
3. Eravallan
4. Irular.
5. Kadar
6. Kammara (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
7. Kanikaran, Kanikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah and
Ambasamudram taluk of Tirunelveli District).
8. Kaniyan, Kanyan.
9. Kattunayakan.
10. Kochu Velan.
11. Konda Kapus.
12. Kondareddis.
13. Koraga.
14. Kota (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
15. Kudiya, Melakudi.
16. Kurichchan.
17. Kurumbas (in the Nilgiris District).
18. Kurumans.
19. MahaMalasar.
20. MalaiArayan.
21. MalaiPandaram.
22. Malai Vedan.
23. Malakkuravan.
24. Malasar.
25. Malayali (in Dharmapuri, Vellore, Pudukottai, Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore,
Tiruvannamalai, Villupuram, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur Districts).
26. Malayakandi.
27. Mannan.
28. Mudugar,Muduvan.
29. Muthuvan.
30. Pallayan.
31. Palliyan.
32. Palliyar.
33. Paniyan.
34. Sholaga.
35. Toda (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
36. Uraly.
94
95