GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
PROSPECTUS
FOR ADMISSION TO
POST GRADUATE DEGREE COURSES IN YOGA & NATUROPATHY
[M.D. YOGA & NATUROPATHY]
AT
GOVERNMENT YOGA AND NATUROPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGE,
CHENNAI – 600 106.
&
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
MEDICAL SCIENCES, CHENGALPATTU- 603 001.
2025 - 2026 Session
(As per G.O. (D) No.934, Health and Family Welfare [IM I-2]
Department, dated: 12.08.2025 and as amended from time to time).
LAST DATE FOR ONLINE REGISTRATION OF APPLICATION IS
12.09.2025 BEFORE 5.00 PM.
SELECTION COMMITTEE,
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY,
ARIGNAR ANNA GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL OF INDIAN MEDICINE CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI- 600 106.
Website: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in
www.tnayushselection.org.
For any Queries, please contact 044-26216244.
Fees for online application Rs. 3000/-
1
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
1 Date of Notification 31.08.2025
2 Date of Commencement of online 31.08.2025
application
3 Last date for online submission of 12.09.2025 upto 5:00 P.M.
application
4 Tentative date of Entrance Examination Will be informed through the official website
& Declaration of Result “www.tnayushselection.org”
5 Date of declaration of Rank list Will be hosted in the official website.
6 Details of counselling
Will be hosted in the official website.
COUNSELLING FOR SPECIAL SELECTION COMMITTEE,
7
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE
CATEGORY:
& HOMOEOPATHY,
IN PERSON ONLY ARIGNAR ANNA GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL
OF INDIAN MEDICINE CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI – 600 106.
8 Official website www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org
9 Helpline Number 044-26216244
2
INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
1. Candidates seeking admission to Post Graduate Degree (MD Yoga and Naturopathy) courses
in Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College, Chennai / International Institute of
Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Sciences, Chengalpattu affiliated to the Tamil Nadu Dr.
M.G.R. Medical University, for the academic session 2025-2026 can be accessed from the
following official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org. The
application submission, fees payment and counselling will be ONLINE for the academic
year 2025- 2026.
2. Any change or modification and relevant information pertaining to this admission process
will be made available only on the website www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org.
3. The Candidates are instructed to visit the website at least two times a day for updates from
the date of registration till the end of admission process without fail. The Selection
Committee will not be responsible for consequences resulting due to non-diligent follow-up
of notifications and publications appearing on the website regarding admission to MD Yoga
and Naturopathy) courses 2025-2026 Session.
4. Admission to Post Graduate Courses [MD (Yoga & Naturopathy] will be made purely on
merit, based on the marks obtained in the Entrance Examination that will be conducted by
the Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy. Tentative
Entrance Exam date and the venue of the Entrance Exam will be announced through the
official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org.
5. REGISTRATION FEE
a. The registration fee for Online application is Rs.3000/- (Rupees Three Thousand Only)
(non-refundable) and it should be paid through online Bank payment portal in the
website.
b. All Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Caste (Arunthathiyar) / Scheduled Tribe candidates of
Tamil Nadu native are EXEMPTED from payment of the registration fee for online
application.
6. ONLINE PROCESSING FEE
All candidates would like to participate in the online counselling will have to remit a non-
refundable amount of Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) via online portal, as online
processing fee before choice filling.
3
7. PAYMENT DETAILS:
Description OC/BC/ BCM/MBC SC/SCA/ST TIME
Registration fee for
3000 Exempted While applying
online application
Online Processing
1000 Before choice filling
fee
At the time of choice
Advance Tuition fee 5000
locking
• After the receipt of the joining report from the Principal of the Government Yoga &
Naturopathy Medical College, Chennai and International Institute of Yoga &
Naturopathy Medical Sciences, Chengalpattu advance tuition will be transferred to the
respective colleges to get adjusted with the Tuition Fees to be paid by the candidates.
8. The candidates allotted to M.D. (Yoga and Naturopathy) course through Selection
Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine, and Homoeopathy, Arumbakkam,
Chennai, will alone be registered for M.D. (Yoga and Naturopathy) Course in The Tamil
Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University.
4
I. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
1. The Candidates must ensure their eligibility criteria before submitting the online application
form. The candidates are instructed to go through the Prospectus carefully and be clear about all
the instructions with regard to the submission of the online application form.
2. The application form other than the one filled in online mode will not be accepted, under any
circumstances.
3. a. Candidates should fill up all mandatory columns, upload all required documents and submit
the duly filled in online application. The candidates may download their filled in online
application form and secure a copy of the same for their future references. Subsequent
submission of supporting document(s), is not accepted either on courier / post / or in person.
b. Scanned PDF copies of all original certificates must be uploaded, while filling the online
application form. The original certificates should be produced in person only at the time of
admission in the respective college.
4. Service candidates should upload their service particulars as per Annexure – II (Service
Proforma) duly certified by the forwarding authority with date and seal along with the filled in
online application form. They should submit their hard copy of duly filled online Application
only through the proper channel with the remarks of the forwarding authorities in the format
prescribed in the application form to the Secretary, Selection Committee, Commissionerate of
Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy. It should compulsorily reach on or before the last date as
mentioned above. If not, applications will summarily be rejected irrespective of the date of
submission by the applicant and date of forwarding by the competent authority. Advance copies
from the service candidates will not be accepted.
5. A list of prima facie eligible candidates will be uploaded in the websites
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org, along with the corresponding Application
Register Number (A.R. No.), which will invariably be the Entrance Exam Number also.
6. All information pertaining to M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) admission will be notified in the
official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org, from time to time.
Candidates are advised to check / visit the website minimum twice daily for date of entrance
examination, entrance exam result, provisional rank list, the online Counselling Schedule, and
other information / intimations, etc., The selection Committee will not be held responsible, if
any candidate failed to appear in the Entrance Examination, online Counselling etc., No
individual correspondence in this regard shall be entertained.
5
7. UNAUTHORISED ABSENCE:
In case of unauthorized absence of candidate for one month or more after getting admitted to the
course, the candidate will be treated as having discontinued without notice and the vacancy will
be filled up from the waiting list depending on the availability of time before the prescribed cut-
off date. Candidates will have to give a declaration to this effect at the time of admission as in
Annexure – IV. If the period of absence is beyond the stipulated date as specified by Selection
Committee, the candidate must pay the discontinuation fee as per clause 52 of this prospectus.
8. Note for special category: Persons with Benchmark disability (PwD)
a. The candidates applying under PwD are instructed to submit their required documents
through online and hard copy should be sent to the Selection Committee along with the
details of their application registration number after final submission.
b. At the time of filling the online application, it is mandatory to upload the necessary
supportive documents as mentioned in Annexure-V (with Full Size Photograph exhibiting
the deformity).
c. Special Category rank differs completely from that of the General Category rank.
d. Special Category candidates cannot claim the same rank in the General Category and vice
versa.
e. Candidates are requested to produce a certificate from the District Medical Board of the
district concerned, constituted for this purpose assessing the nature and the extent of physical
disability in the format prescribed in the Annexure-V. The candidate should have obtained
the certificate within 3 months prior to submission of application for seeking admission
under this category. If the certificate is obtained earlier, the application will be rejected.
f. The Candidates applying for M.D. (Yoga and Naturopathy) Course will be required to
undergo medical examination in person by a Medical Board constituted for the purpose by
the Directorate of Medical Education to ascertain and confirm the nature and extent of
physical disability.
g. The Candidate claim under Special category should submit the hard copy of their online
application form along with the relevant supportive documents to selection committee
address.
h. The Counselling for the Special Categories will be done in off line mode before the
General Category Online Counselling at Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian
Medicine & Homoeopathy, Arignar Anna Government Hospital of Indian Medicine Campus
Arumbakkam, Chennai 106.
6
i. Counselling date for Special Category will be intimated in the website.
j. The claim under Special Category will not be considered, under any circumstances without
the required documents and the application of such candidate shall be considered under
General Category only, if candidate fulfils the norms for the General Category.
k. If adequate number of eligible candidates is not available under Special Category, then the
earmarked seats will be reverted back to General Category and filled up with candidates on
the basis of merit and communal rotation.
II. ELIGIBILITY FOR ADMISSION
9. a) Candidate who has passed in BNYS Regular Degree course conducted by the Tamil Nadu
Dr. M.G.R. Medical University / any other University recognized by UGC under regular
stream or a pass in N.D.(Osm) under regular stream.
b) Candidates should have successfully completed the Compulsory Rotatory Residential
Internship (CRRI) and should have registered their names with the Tamil Nadu
Board of Indian Medicine, Chennai-106 on or before 31.08.2025.
10. • Candidate should be a Citizen of India and a Native of Tamil Nadu or should have
undergone B.N.Y.S Degree course in the State of Tamil Nadu.
• Candidates of Tamil Nadu nativity who have completed the B.N.Y.S / N. D (Osm) Course
in other States shall upload a Nativity certificate of having his / her nativity in Tamil Nadu
issued by the competent authority only in the specified format prescribed in the Annexure -
I and should also upload the Eligibility Certificate from the Tamil Nadu Dr. M. G. R.
Medical University, Chennai.
• Candidates from other States who have studied BNYS continuously in Tamil Nadu will be
considered under the Open Category.
• Submission of a false Nativity Certificate, if detected, at any stage during the course of
study, will result in expulsion of the candidate and initiation of criminal proceedings
against the candidate and their parents, as per the law.
• Previously obtained Nativity Certificates (Old format) or e-Nativity Certificates in the
latest updated format issued by an authority not below the rank of Zonal Deputy Tahsildar
of the concerned Revenue Jurisdiction will be accepted.
• Community Certificates issued by other States will not be considered for reservation. Such
candidates will be treated under the Open Category.
• Candidates who are claiming community reservation of Tamil Nadu should upload the
following two certificates,
7
i. Community Certificate issued by competent authority from Revenue Department of
Tamil Nadu Government with official seal; and
ii. Community Certificate of either of their Parents issued by competent authority from
Revenue Department of Tamil Nadu Government with official seal.
11. Candidates who secured less than 40% of total marks in the entrance examination in case of
OC, BC, BCM, MBC / DNC communities and less than 35% of total marks, in the case of
SC/SCA/ST communities shall not be considered for counselling. For Service candidates, the
minimum eligibility marks for admission to counselling will be 35% of total marks for all
communities.
12. NOT ELIGIBLE
• Candidates who have joined a Post Graduate Degree [MD (Yoga and Naturopathy)] in any
branch and discontinue the course on any grounds after the cutoff date fixed by the
Affiliating University are not eligible to apply for two subsequent academic years.
• Candidates who have completed a Post Graduate Degree [MD (Yoga and Naturopathy)] or
the candidates who possess a Post Graduate Degree [MD (Yoga and Naturopathy)] in one
Specialty / Branch of Study are Not Eligible to apply for admission to any other Post
Graduate Degree [MD (Yoga and Naturopathy)] in any other branches.
• Degree / Diploma in Yoga / Naturopathy obtained in distant mode / correspondence are
not eligible. 3 years course in Naturopathy are also not eligible.
III. DEFINITION OF SERVICE CANDIDATES & NON-SERVICE CANDIDATES
13. SERVICE CANDIDATES
The following categories of Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Graduates will only be treated as
Service Candidates and considered for selection against 50% of seats reserved exclusively for
Service Candidates.
(i) Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Graduates who were selected by the Tamil Nadu Public
Service Commission / Medical Services Recruitment Board and other regularized
service candidates and appointed in the Tamil Nadu Medical Service on regular basis,
who have put in minimum of TWO years satisfactory and continuous service
excluding leave period such as Earned Leave, Unearned Leave on Medical Certificate,
Unearned Leave on Private Affairs, Maternity Leave and any other unauthorized
absence, as on 31.07.2025 either in Tamil Nadu Medical Service or local bodies and
State Organizations.
8
(ii) Candidates above 50 years as on 31.07.2025 are not eligible to apply.
(iii) Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Graduates who are approved Probationers and who are
working
a. As Medical Officers (continuously for two years) in Local Bodies in Tamil Nadu. A
doctor absorbed from the Panchayat Union into Government Service as per G.O.Ms.
No 435 / H&FW / IMI-2 Dept. dated: 23-11-2000 will be considered as Service
Candidates provided that they should have completed 2 years of service.
b. In Government of India Institutions in the State of Tamil Nādu.
c. In Public Sector Undertaking and Organizations under the Control of
Government of India in Tamil Nadu.
d. In Undertaking or Organization of Government of Tamil Nadu.
Note:
The candidates under Clause 13, sub clause (iii) item (a) to (d) above should give an
undertaking to the concerned authorities that they will serve for 5 years in their respective
institutions after the completion of course. They should produce a certificate from the
concerned authority to show that they have given such an undertaking as per Tamil Nadu
Government rules.
14. NON-SERVICE CANDIDATES
The following category of Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Graduates will be treated as Non-
Service Candidates.
➢ Private Yoga & Naturopathy Practitioners Registered under Tamil Nadu Board of
Indian Medicine.
➢ Those service candidates selected by TNPSC / MSRB who have put in less than two
years of continuous regular service as on 31.07.2025 will be treated as non-Service
candidates.
➢ All others who have put in less than two years of State Government Service or who
are working in Central Government, Public Sector undertaking, Central Government
Health Scheme (CGHS), Local Bodies, National Rural Health Mission and
Municipalities in Tamil Nadu and Tamil Nadu Government Undertakings and
Organizations will be treated as non-Service candidates.
15. PROCEDURE FOR FILLING AND SUBMISSION OF ONLINE REGISTRATION
FORM
• Candidates are advised to download the Prospectus from the official website and read it
9
thoroughly before filling the online application form for the academic year 2025–2026.
• The candidate should log in to the official website: www.tnayushselection.org
• The application form will be available online from [Date] to [Date] up to 5:00 P.M.
• Candidates must pay a non-refundable registration fee of Rs. 3,000/- (Rupees Three
Thousand only) towards application form through the online payment portal.
I. General Instructions
a. All mandatory fields in application form must be completed.
b. Relevant documents should be uploaded in PDF format.
c. The completed application form must be submitted online after verifying all details.
d. No request for changes in any particulars will be entertained after the application form
has been submitted.
II. Documents to be Uploaded
Candidates must upload scanned PDF copies of the following original certificates:
1. Class X Mark Sheet (both sides) or Birth Certificate
2. B.N.Y.S. Final Year Mark Sheet or equivalent examination certificate
3. Transfer Certificate obtained after completion of B.N.Y.S.
4. Community Certificate (if applicable)
5. Nativity Certificate (if applicable)
6. Eligibility Certificate from The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University (for candidates
who studied B.N.Y.S. in other Universities)
7. CRRI Completion Certificate
8. Registration Certificate (Tamil Nadu Borad of Indian Medicine)
9. Degree or Provisional-II Certificate
10. Recently taken passport size photograph.
11. Signature in running handwriting. Initials or full name in capital letters are not accepted.
12. Any other supporting document (if applicable)
Note:
• Ensure the photograph and signature are uploaded in the correct fields.
• After submission, candidates are advised to download and keep a copy of the filled-
in online application form for future references.
• The Originals must be produced at the time of Admission in college.
10
III. Declaration and Verification
• All entries in the online application form must be filled carefully by the candidate.
• The candidate must ensure that all information, including academic marks and uploaded
documents, are true and accurate.
• If any discrepancy is found during scrutiny:
a. The candidate will forfeit their admission, regardless of the stage of the course.
b. The candidate will be debarred from pursuing any other course for a period of three
years.
c. Legal/criminal action will be initiated against the candidate for submitting false
documents (e.g., Mark Sheet, Degree Certificate, Community Certificate, Nativity
Certificate, etc.).
IV. Instructions for Filling the Online Registration Form
a. The candidate should verify eligibility before submitting the application form.
b. Only the application form submitted online will be accepted. The application form submitted
through any other mode will be rejected.
V. Accessing and Filling the Online Registration
1. Visit the official website: www.tnayushselection.org
2. Enter the following particulars in the online form:
➢ Name of the Candidate
➢ Name of Parent/Guardian
➢ Permanent and Communication Address
➢ Date of Birth
➢ Gender
➢ Nationality and Nativity
➢ Religion
➢ Community, Caste, and related details
➢ Aadhaar Number
➢ Name of College and University for B.N.Y.S.
➢ Obtained Marks/Maximum Marks and No. of Attempts in Final Year B.N.Y.S.
➢ Mother Tongue
➢ Civic Details
➢ Native District
11
V. Important Points
1. Only one application form should be submitted through online per candidate.
2. Ensure all information and documents are accurate at the time of submission.
3. Incomplete applications or applications without mandatory enclosures will be rejected.
4. Registration fee towards online application once paid is non-refundable.
5. The last date for online application submission and fee payment is final.
6. Application once submitted cannot be modified and withdrawn.
16. METHOD OF FEE PAYMENT:
i. Mode of Payment:
The online application and course fees must be paid through Debit Cards (except Visa /
Master Card), Credit Card, Net Banking, UPI or Digital Wallets (such as Google Pay,
Paytm, etc.). Necessary facilities for payment have been integrated into the online
payment portal.
ii. Important Note:
Mere deduction of the amount from the bank account is not considered as proof of
successful fee payment. Candidates must ensure that the payment confirmation is
received and that the application status reflects the successful transaction.
iii. Preparation before Payment:
Before proceeding with payment, candidates are advised to:
a. Check the validity of their Debit/Credit Card.
b. Keep necessary banking or payment information readily available.
c. Enter all requisite details while making the payment on the portal carefully.
iv. Refund of Advance Tuition Fees:
The candidates withdrawing on or before the prescribed as last date of joining in Round I
and Round II, refund of advance tuition fees will be made only to the bank account for
which details are provided at the time of filling the online application. Candidates are
advised to ensure that the account details entered in the online application form are
accurate and belong to them.
17. Every student has to pay Special Fee and Sports and Welfare Fund every year apart from
Tuition fee. The fee prescribed is subject to revision from time to time.
18. The Examination Fee will be collected at the rate prescribed by the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R.
Medical University from time to time.
12
19. DURATION OF M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) COURSE
The duration of the MD (Yoga and Naturopathy) course is three (3) years.
IV. MODE OF SELECTION AND ADMISSION
20. ENTRANCE EXAMINATION
i. The Entrance Examination for admission to the Post Graduate M.D. (Yoga &
Naturopathy) Course will be conducted as per existing Curriculum / Syllabus of the Tamil
Nadu Dr. M. G. R. Medical University for BNYS Medical Degree Course.
ii. The Entrance Examination will be covering all subjects and will contain 200 Objective
type questions each with four responses (A, B, C, D) in English.
iii. Each question will carry 0.5 (half) mark. There will be NO NEGATIVE MARK for
incorrect responses. No mark will be given for questions not answered. When more than
one answer is indicated or when it is illegible, no mark will be awarded for that answer.
21. i. Non-Service candidates:
Admission to the Post Graduate M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) Course will be made
purely on merit, based on the marks obtained in the Entrance Examination conducted
by the Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy,
Chennai.
Maximum marks for written Entrance examination computed for 100 marks.
ii. Service Candidates:
Admission to the Post Graduate M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) Course will be made
based on merit, based on the marks obtained in the entrance examination and additional
weightage marks awarded to eligible in-service candidates. One mark will be awarded
for each completed year of Government Service. Two marks will be awarded for each
completed year of Government Service in Hill areas and it will be limited to maximum
of 10 marks, as per G.O.(Ms)No.320 Health and Family Welfare [IM 1-2] Department,
dated 26.09.2023.
22. i. Candidate should bring two copies of downloaded Hall Ticket for the Entrance
Examination. One copy of Hall ticket should be submitted to the Hall Superintendent at
the time of examination.
ii. An eligible candidate can get the Application Register Number i.e., A.R. No from the
eligible list that will be uploaded in the official website before the Entrance
Examination. Admission to the Entrance Examination will not confer any rights to the
candidate for admission to the Post Graduate M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) Course if
13
found Ineligible later. Candidates will not be allowed to appear for the Entrance
Examination he / she does not hold the Hall Ticket.
iii. The Hall Superintendent will verify the identity of the examinee with reference to
his/her photograph affixed on the Hall Ticket. The candidate will also be required to
affix their signature in full as part of the identification process. Failure to follow
instructions will result in expulsion of the candidate.
23. i. The Entrance Examination date and venue for Post Graduate M.D. (Yoga &
Naturopathy) Course will be announced through the official websites:
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org and the examination duration will
be of 3 hours in forenoon session at Arignar Anna Government Hospital of Indian
Medicine Campus, Arumbakkam, Chennai - 600 106.
ii. Candidates appearing for Entrance Examination will have to come to the Examination
Center at their own expense and make their own arrangements for stay.
iii. Candidates should be present and seated in their allotted place as per their Application
Register number, 30 minutes prior to the commencement of examination in order to fill
up all examination particulars and identification verification.
iv. Candidates coming 30 minutes after the commencement of the examination will not be
permitted to take the examination.
v. No candidate shall be allowed to carry any textual materials printed or written bits of
paper, electronic and telecommunication gadgets and devices with or without remote
sensing like Cellular Phones, Pen scanners or Electronic Diary, Smart Watches etc.
inside the examination hall.
vi. No candidate shall be allowed to leave the Examination Hall before the end of half an
hour after opening of question papers or one hour after commencement. Candidates
shall not leave their seats even for using the Restroom without permission. Frequent
visits to restroom may be avoided. Once a Candidate leaves the Hall for any other
reasons, he/she will not be permitted to re-enter the hall.
vii. Candidate shall maintain strict silence in the examination hall. Any misconduct found
out by the Hall Superintendent will result in the forfeiture of the right to continue the
examination. His/ Her answer sheets will not be considered for valuation. Further
he/she will not be allowed to apply for the Post Graduate M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy)
Course for two consecutive years. The decision of the Hall Superintendent in this
connection shall be final.
14
24. Answers should be shaded with their blue or black ball pen (NOT GEL) in the OMR sheets as
per the instructions given in the OMR Sheet. There will be no rechecking, revaluation or
recount of answer sheets. The Selection Committee's decision in this matter is final.
25. The Question Paper, Blank Sheets (if any), OMR Answer Sheets, etc. are the property of the
Committee and no part or whole shall be retained by a candidate under any circumstances. Any
attempt to retain or take away these materials by a candidate shall be construed as serious
misconduct and the candidate will be immediately disqualified and his/her paper will be seized
and not evaluated.
26. Provisional Rank List
A provisional rank list arrived after the Entrance Exam will be uploaded in the website.
Admission to the M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) course will be made strictly based on this rank
list only. The Secretary, Selection Committee will publish the provisional rank list on the
official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org.
27. In case more than one candidate has secured the same marks, the tie shall be resolved / Inter se
merit may be arrived on the basis of the following factors in the order of priority.
(i) Percentage of Total marks obtained in Final B.N.Y.S / N.D. (Osm)
(ii) Number of attempts in final Year Examinations.
(iii) Seniority in age will be given preference
28. The number of seats may be changed without notice. However, the exact distribution of seats,
Specialty wise will be uploaded in the official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org
29. ALLOTMENT OF SEATS:
The Selection Committee will allot seats to the Colleges and Branches of study based on the
merit and following 69% Rule of Reservation depending upon the seat matrices provided by
the affiliating University and subject to the availability of seats at the time of individual’s turn.
30. SEATS RESERVED FOR SERVICE CANDIDATES
A total of 50% of seats in each specialty are reserved for Service Candidates, in addition to
that, Service Candidates may also be selected in the General Category. In case an odd number
of seats remains in any specialty in the total seats sanctioned for that specialty, that seat shall
be allotted to General Category and will be filled based on the Merit and Communal rotation.
31. RULE OF RESERVATION:
Rule of Reservation will be followed as follows:
15
Open Competition - 31%
Backward Classes - 26.5%
Backward Classes (Muslim) - 3.5%
Most Backward/ Denotified Communities - 20%
Scheduled Caste - 18%
Scheduled Tribe - 1%
Within the 18% reservation for Scheduled Castes 16% out of 18% reservation will be
provided for S.C. Arunthathiyars (SCA). While filling the registration form, kindly refer
Caste Code mentioned in Communities annexed with the Prospectus.
32. Any remaining unfilled seats for want of adequate number of eligible candidates belonging to
SCA Communities shall be filled by candidates belonging to SC Community other than
Arunthathiyars as per merit and vice versa without exceeding the quota for SC Community as a
whole.
33. Any remaining reserved seats in ST quota for want of adequate number of eligible candidates
belonging to ST Community shall be allotted to candidates belonging to SC Community as per
merit without exceeding the quota for SC and ST Community as a whole.
34. Any remaining unfilled seats in BCM Community for want of adequate number of eligible
candidates after exhausting the merit list shall be filled up on merit basis by candidates
belonging to BC Community without exceeding the quota for BC Community as a whole.
35 Candidates will be allowed to choose their Branch of Study at the time of choice filling, subject
to the availability of vacancy in that branch in the college, when the candidate gets his / her turn.
Branch once opted and allotted at the time of online Counselling shall be final and will not be
allowed to change subsequently under any circumstances. Similarly, no transfer from one
branch to another branch will be allowed during the course period of 3 years.
VI. TENTATIVE SEAT MATRIX
36. The number of seats may be changed without notice based on seat matrices provided by the
Affiliating University. The Tentative seat apportionment for the academic year 2025-2026 is as
follows:
16
Government Yoga & Naturopathy Medical College & Hospital, Chennai-106.
Sl.No. Name of the Branch No. of seats
1 Branch I – Naturopathy 5
2 Branch II – Yoga 5
3 Branch III – Acupuncture and Energy Medicine 5
Total 15
International Institute of Yoga & Naturopathy Medical Sciences, Chengalpattu- 603001
Sl.No. Name of the Branch No. of seats
1 Branch I – Naturopathy 10
2 Branch II – Yoga 10
3 Branch III – Acupuncture and Energy Medicine 10
Total 30
37. Special categories: (PwD)
Five percentage (5%) of the total number of seats available in the Government Yoga &
Naturopathy Medical College / International Institute of Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
Sciences are reserved for the persons with disability (PwD) candidates.
a) Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College,
Chennai-106 : 1 seat
b) International Institute of Yoga and Naturopathy
Medical Sciences, Chengalpattu-603001 : 1 seat
38. No re-allotment for Special Category (only for PWD).
If adequate number of eligible candidates is not available under Special Category, the
earmarked seats will be reverted back to General Category. Any discontinued / not joined
vacancies in Special Category (PWD only) will be added to General Category in the
subsequent phases of counselling.
39. ROUNDS OF ONLINE COUNSELLING BASED ON THE VACANCIES
There are four Rounds of counselling
I. Round 1
II. Round 2
III. Round 3
IV. Stray Round.
Online counselling for Round 2, Round 3 and Stray Round will be done only if there is vacancy.
17
40. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR ONLINE COUNSELLING:
i. Online Processing Fee:
All candidates must pay a non-refundable amount of ₹1,000/- (Rupees One thousand only)
towards online processing fee for counselling at the time of choice filling for Government
Quota seats.
ii. Advance Tuition Fee:
At the time of choice filling, candidates must pay a refundable advance tuition fee of
Rs.5,000 (Rupees Five Thousand only) for Government seats.
Note: This amount will not be refunded if a seat is allotted from the third round of
counselling.
iii. Counselling Schedule:
The counselling schedule will be published on the official website.
Candidates must login and lock their choices for each round of counselling within the
stipulated date and time as per the published schedule.
iv. Choice Filling:
• Candidates are advised to be careful during choice filling and to select preferred
specialties according to their individual preferences.
• Choices can be edited until they are locked.
• Once choices are locked, they cannot be modified under any circumstances.
v. Seat Allotment:
Admission to MD (Yoga and Naturopathy) Courses will be through online counselling, based
on candidate provisional rank and as per reservation norms, considering the preferences
entered by the candidate.
vi. Security Guidelines:
Candidates must not share their login credentials (Login ID, Password, OTP) with anyone to
ensure data security and prevent misuse.
vii. Provisional Allotment:
Provisionally selected candidates for Government seats must download the provisional
allotment order and join the college in which they are allotted within the stipulated date.
viii. Transfers:
Mutual transfers or individual requests for college transfer will not be entertained under any
circumstances.
ix. Eligibility for further Rounds:
18
Candidates who have joined a seat up to Round 3 of State Quota counselling will not be
eligible to participate in subsequent rounds for the academic year 2025–2026.
I. ROUND 1 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING
a. Candidates must pay the following fees through the online bank payment portal:
• A non-refundable online processing fee of Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) at
the time of Choice filling.
• A refundable advance tuition fee of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) at the time
of Choice locking.
b. Candidates are advised to be careful during choice filling and are encouraged to select only
preferred colleges and specialties.
c. Choices can be edited before locking. However, once the choices are locked, they cannot be
modified under any circumstances.
d. Candidates who are allotted a seat in Round 1 of the online counselling should download
their Provisional allotment order and joined the course in the respective college on or
before the stipulated date and time.
II. ROUND 2 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING
a. Candidates who wish to retain their allotted seats and do not want a change in college are
not required to participate in Round 2.
b. Candidates who are allotted a seat in Round 1 and not joined/ Joined but discontinued
from the course i.e., before Round 2, will remain eligible to participate in in Round 2.
online counselling.
c. Re-allotment of seats will be permitted during Round 2 and Round 3 of counselling,
based on the candidate's rank and in accordance with the Rule of Reservation.
d. No re-choice filling is required for candidates who locked their choice in Round 1 but
were not allotted a seat.
e. Fresh choice filling is permitted in Round 2 only for candidates who did not lock their
choice in Round 1.
f. If a candidate is upgraded/reallotted in Round 2, he/ she have no claim over the seat
allotted to him/her in Round-1, and have to join the seat allotted in Round 2. The seat
allotted in Round 1 will be made available to other candidates based on descending order
of the provisional rank list and not on ascending order.
g. Choice filling for Round 2 will follow the payment of online processing fee. It is not
mandatory for:
19
• Candidates seeking upgradation
• Not-joined candidates
• Unallotted Candidates
h. A candidate who has not joined or discontinued the course before the stipulated date and
time will remain eligible for Round 3 online counselling without forfeiting any fee.
i. A candidate who joined and discontinued the course after the stipulated date and time
provided by the Selection Committee, the candidate should forfeit the advance Tuition
Fee already paid, and should pay the discontinuation Fee and he/she will not eligible for
Round 3.
Virtual Vacancies
• If a candidate allotted a seat in Round 1 opts for upgradation in Round 2, that Round 1
seat will be displayed as a virtual vacancy.
• All candidates will be allowed to fill choices for virtual vacancies during Round 2 choice
filling.
• However, such seats will be converted to real vacancies and allotted in Round 2 only if
the candidate from Round 1 vacates or upgrades the seat.
III. ROUND 3 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING
After completion of Round 2 of online counselling, the remaining vacancies will be filled up
with the candidates from the Provisional Merit list by Round 3 online counselling.
Fee Payment
Candidates scheduled to participate in Round 3 of online counselling must pay a non-
refundable online processing fee of ₹1,000/- (Rupees One thousand only) via the online bank
payment portal. Candidates who have already paid the online processing fee in previous
rounds need not to pay again, provided they have not been allotted a seat in earlier rounds.
Eligibility for Round 3
a. Candidates who filled their choice in Round 1 or Round 2 but were not allotted any seat are
eligible and not required to fill their choice again.
b. Fresh choice filling is allowed for the candidates who are already in the Provisional Merit list
and not filled their choice in Round 1 or Round 2.
c. Candidates who have joined a seat up to Round 3 of State Quota counselling will not be
eligible to participate in any further rounds of counselling for the academic year 2025–2026.
d. Candidates upgraded from Round 2 to Round 3 must:
20
• Have no claim over the seat allotted to them in Round 2.
• Have to Join the seat allotted in Round 3 within the stipulated time.
e. Once a candidate joined the seat allotted in Round 3, they will not be allowed to upgrade,
withdraw, or resign from that seat under any circumstances.
f. Candidates who fail to join the seat allotted in Round 3 will:
• Forfeit both the online processing fee and advance tuition fee paid
• Become ineligible for any further rounds of counselling.
Hence, the Candidates are advised to exercise due diligence in their options and do not fill
unwanted options in which they do not wish to pursue studies.
IV. STRAY ROUND OF COUNSELLING
a. Stray vacancies, if any, arising after the completion of Round 3 counselling will be filled
through a Stray Round, conducted by the Selection Committee under the direction of the
Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy.
b. Only candidates who are not holding any seat in the M.D. (Yoga and Naturopathy) course
(have not been allotted seats in Round 1, Round 2 and Round 3) are eligible to participate in this
round.
c. Candidates who have already joined any seat under State Quota for M.D. (Yoga and
Naturopathy) are not eligible for this round.
d. Candidates who freshly participate in the Stray Round (or any subsequent special rounds),
they should pay the registration fee of Rs.3,000/- (Rupees Three Thousand only) towards online
application, online Processing fee of Rs.1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) and advance
tuition fee of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) via the online bank payment portal.
Note: These amounts are non-refundable.
e. If a seat is allotted in the Stray Round:
• The candidate must download the provisional allotment order and join the allotted college
within the stipulated date and time mentioned in the allotment order.
f. If a candidate allotted a seat in the Stray Round:
• Fails to download the allotment order, or
• Downloaded but fails to join the allotted college within the stipulated deadline,
then:
• The advance tuition fee will be forfeited, and
21
• The candidate will be barred from participating in M.D. ( Yoga and Naturopathy )
counselling for the next academic year.
g. If a candidate joins the college through the Stray Round and then discontinues the course after
the cutoff date as prescribed by State Selection Committee, they must:
• Forfeit the advance tuition fee,
• Pay a discontinuation fee of ₹10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only), and
• De barred from participating in M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) counselling for the next
academic year.
i. Malpractice / Misconduct / Legal Violations
a). If any candidate is found to have engaged in impersonation, suppressed or misrepresented
facts, or submitted falsified/bogus certificates, the provisional allotment will be cancelled and
legal/criminal proceedings will be initiated.
b). If, during the Entrance Examination or at any stage of the allotment/admission process for
M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) 2025–2026 in Tamil Nadu, a candidate is found guilty of
impersonation (e.g. mismatched photograph/signature/documents), they will be handed over to
the police by the Principal or the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, and the
case will be pursued under the Indian Penal Code. Such candidates will be permanently
debarred from future M.D. ( Yoga & Naturopathy ) admissions in Tamil Nadu.
ii. Disclaimer
The Selection Committee shall not be responsible for:
• Statutory approvals (including annual renewals)
iii. Seat Matrix Notification
The seat matrix for Yoga & Naturopathy Medical Colleges will be published on the official
website prior to counselling.
41. Candidates allotted seat in Special Category are not eligible for General Counselling.
42. Branch and College once opted and allotted to the candidate at the time of online Counselling
cannot be changed subsequently under any circumstances.
43. The Post Graduate Degree M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) courses admissions for 2025-2026
session will close on the cutoff date of admission as prescribed by the Ministry of AYUSH,
Government of India, Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University for the academic year 2025-
2026.
44. Candidates who have joined a Post-Graduate Degree M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) Course in any
discipline and have discontinued the course on any grounds after the cut-off date, are not
22
eligible to apply for two subsequent academic years of any discipline in Post Graduate degree
Course. Further the candidate shall be considered as discontinued and should pay the
Discontinuation Fee as per this prospectus.
45. The candidates who join Post Graduate Degree course should not indulge in any kind of
agitation / strike / ragging activity inside / outside the college campus during the course of
study. Candidates will have to give a Discipline Declaration to this effect at the time of
admission as in Annexure – III. Candidates found to take part in any such activities mentioned
above will be expelled from the course/college at any point during the course of study and
criminal action will be taken against them.
46. Official Communication
All communications related to the counselling process will be published exclusively on the
official website: www.tnayushselection.org.
Any changes, updates, modifications, or important announcements pertaining to the admission
process will be immediately updated on the website.
Candidates are advised to check the website regularly for the latest information.
VII. SALARY TO SERVICE/STIPEND TO NON-SERVICE CANDIDATES
47. SALARY FOR THE SERVICE CANDIDATES IN LIEU OF STIPEND:
i. Candidates who have been regularly appointed in the Tamil Nadu Medical Service and
selected under the category of service candidates will alone be paid salary as per
Government orders in force.
ii. Service candidates will be paid salary by their respective organizations, institutions /
Government etc.,
iii. Service Candidates from Local Bodies will not be paid any salary by the Government
during the study period.
48. STIPEND TO NON-SERVICE CANDIDATES:
It should be noted carefully that the M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) Course is a full-time
programme, where the candidate is expected to be exposed on all days to a variety of patients.
For this reason, an amount specified by the Government will be paid as stipend to the
candidates. Therefore, students shall not participate in any activity outside the college or in
addition to the course of medical duties and no permission shall be granted for any reason
whatsoever.
23
49. All the Post Graduate [MD (Yoga and Naturopathy)] students shall attend the Out Patient
department, in patient ward and the theory classes for all the Post Graduate [MD (Yoga and
Naturopathy)] courses everyday regularly without fail. In case, a student attends only Out-
patient department or In-patient ward session and does not attend the Theory classes or vice
versa, such Post Graduate [MD (Yoga and Naturopathy)] student shall not be eligible for any
stipend for the day since the M.D (Yoga and Naturopathy) is a whole-time course. Every student
shall fulfil the minimum requirement of attendance as may be prescribed by the Tamil Nadu Dr.
M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai from time to time for becoming eligible to take up the
examination of the said University. If a Post Graduate [MD (Yoga and Naturopathy)] student is
not permitted to take up the said University’s examinations as per the regulations in force and
amended from time to time and consequently if the period of study is extended, no stipend shall
be paid to such student for such period of extension of study. The Post Graduate [MD (Yoga and
Naturopathy)] students shall be subject to the rules, regulations, conventions and practices being
followed in the hospital and the concerned medical college and code of conduct, rules etc., as
laid down by the Government, and The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University.
50. In case of breach of any such rules, regulations etc., as stated above, the Head of the Institution
of respective Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College/Institution shall take
appropriate disciplinary action against such student including the disqualification of the student
to continue further post graduate [MD (Yoga and Naturopathy)] studies and communicate the
same to the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, and Government.
51. IMPORTANT CONDITIONS
i. Service candidates will not be eligible for study leave.
ii. The entire study period of the service candidates for undergoing M.D. (Yoga &
Naturopathy) course will be treated as duty for all purpose viz. probation, increment,
pension, etc., except for the purpose of pay and leave.
iii. In case, where the study period is to be counted towards probation period, G.O. have
to be obtained for the relaxation of the relevant rules.
iv. No paid post will be given to candidates who are selected for M.D. (Yoga &
Naturopathy) Course and they shall work full time in the Department of their
respective specialties. They should not indulge in private practice during the period of
study, since they have to be ready to present in the campus all the time as a resident.
24
52. All Candidates (Service and Non-service) undergoing the M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) courses
should execute a Bond as per Annexure VI to the effect that in the event of discontinuing their
studies before completion of the course, they shall be liable for refund of the full amount of
stipend received by them along with three sureties in permanent Government Service of equal
rank or higher rank at the time of admission to the course. Further, the Candidates who
discontinue the course on or after the last date of allotment of seats pertaining to the academic
session 2025-2026 as fixed by Ministry of AYUSH / Affiliating University, shall pay the
Discontinuation Fees besides forgoing Tuition Fees to the Concerned Government Yoga &
Naturopathy Medical College/institution a sum of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) by
means of Demand Draft drawn in favour of “The Director of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy, Chennai -106” payable at Chennai. Unless the penalty amount is paid in total,
the Candidates will not be relieved and original certificates / documents will be retained by the
college authorities. All candidates shall execute an Agreement Bond as per Annexure-VI, to this
effect at the time of admission to the College.
53. Forfeiture of Tuition and Other Fees:
In addition to the above:
• Candidates who discontinue on or after the cut-off date may also have to forfeit all the
fees paid him/her during the period of study.
• This applies even if the discontinuation is due to personal, medical, or professional
reasons.
Important Note:
Candidates are advised to thoroughly understand the bond conditions and evaluate their
commitment before accepting admission, as the above rules will be strictly enforced.
54, Service candidates selected to the course should execute a bond in the prescribed form available
in the college/institution at the time of admission, for Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten lakhs only)
along with three sureties in permanent Government Service of equal rank or higher rank than the
candidate for an equivalent amount at the time of admission, in pursuance of their undertaking
to the effect that they shall serve the concerned Government, Local Body, etc. for a minimum
period of five years after the completion of the course.
If the service candidate serves for a period less than five years, the proportion of the salary
or stipend or other payments made to the candidate during the course period in relation to the
ratio of period in whole months served over the requirement of sixty months shall be treated as
the candidate entitlement and the remaining amount which relates to the short fall and period of
25
commitment shall be recovered from the service candidate or paid by candidate prior to
candidate’s discharge from service.
55. Candidates undergoing the M.D. (Yoga & Naturopathy) Course who have secured appointment
in Tamil Nadu Medical Service through the Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission (or) Tamil
Nadu Medical Services Recruitment Board shall not be permitted to discontinue the course
without satisfying the condition of their bond. They shall also not be permitted to rejoin the
M.D. Course midway at a later point of time or retain rights to join the M.D. Course without
completing the waiting period and without appearing in the Entrance Examination pertaining to
the relevant academic year, except in cases where specific orders from the Health Department of
Government of Tamil Nadu regulating such readmission is issued.
56. All Government Orders issued and to be issued from time to time, relating to any of the
matters mentioned in this Prospectus, shall be deemed to form an integral part of this
Prospectus. The terms and conditions laid down in such Government Orders will be
automatically incorporated and will have binding effect on all candidates.
57. No admission, re-allotment / transfer shall be made after cut-off date for the academic year as
per the guidelines issued by the MoA (Ministry of AYUSH) and The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R.
Medical University.
58. COVID INSTRUCTION
The special category candidates and their parents are instructed to follow the standard
preventive measures to reduce the risk of COVID-19 during the counselling as per the
Government order time to time.
26
CHECK LIST FOR M.D.(YOGA &NATUROPATHY) ADMISSION 2025-2026 SESSION
CATEGORY- I: CANDIDATES WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU
AND STUDIED BNYS COURSE IN TAMIL NADU
CATEGORY - II: CANDIDATES WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU
BUT STUDIED BNYS COURSE PARTLY/ FULLY IN
OUTSIDE TAMIL NADU
CATEGORY - III: CANDIDATES WHO ARE NON - NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU
AND STUDIED BNYS COURSE CONTINUOUSLY IN
TAMIL NADU
CATEGORY
CERTIFICATES/ DOCUMENTS CATEGORY I CATEGORY II
III
DOCUMENTS OF CANDIDATE’S ARE AS FOLLOWS:
X-Mark Sheet / Birth Certificate ✓ ✓ ✓
BNYS Final Year Mark Sheet/Sheets ✓ ✓ ✓
Transfer Certificate ✓ ✓ ✓
Nativity Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil Nadu ✓ ✓
Community Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil
✓ ✓
Nadu (except- OC)
Special Category Certificates for Persons with Bench mark
Disabilities, (if applicable) ✓ ✓ ✓
Candidate’s Aadhar card ✓ ✓ ✓
DOCUMENTS OF PARENTS ARE AS FOLLOWS:
Parent Community Certificate from Competent Authority of
✓ ✓
Tamil Nadu (except- OC)
27
ROUND FREE RESIGNATION EXIT WITH Eligibility FOR DISCONTINUATION FEES
EXIT FORFEITURE FURTHER AFTER JOINING
OF FEES COUNSELLING
Round 1 Allowed Allowed Allowed to Eligible for NIL, Before Round 2
exit further
counselling
Round 2 Allowed Allowed only Allowed to Eligible for If the candidates resign before the
exit within further stipulated date in Round 2 the
once within
stipulated counselling candidates will be allowed free
stipulated time
time without exit.
forfeiture
After the stipulated date in round
2, discontinuation fees will be
Rs.10,00,000 (Ten lakhs Only)
and forfeit Advance tuition fees.
Round 3 Not Not allowed If not joined, Not allowed for After joining the allotted seat of
allowed forfeit Advance next round round 3, discontinuation fees will
tuition fee be Rs.10,00,000 (Ten Lakhs
only) and forfeiture of Advance
tuition fees will also apply.
Round 4 Not Not allowed If not joined Not eligible for After joining the allotted seat of
(Stray allowed forfeit next one year. Stray round, discontinuation fees
round) Advance will be Rs.10,00,000 (Ten lakhs
tuition fees Only) and forfeiture of Advance
and not tuition fees will also apply.
eligible for
next one years
28
ROUND CANDIDATE FORFEITURE OF FEES ELIGIBILITY
If allotted and Can participate in round 2 for
No forfeiture of fees
joined re- allotment
If allotted and
Can participate in subsequent rounds
not No forfeiture of fees
of counseling
joined/Resigned
Round 1 If not allotted Can participate in subsequent rounds
of counseling
If not choice Can participate in subsequent rounds
locked of counseling
No forfeiture of fees. Allowed to Allowed for further rounds of
If allotted and
vacate seat once before the counseling
joined
stipulated date.
If allotted / No forfeiture of fees Allowed for further rounds of
Re-allotted counseling
and not joined
Round 2 If not choice
No forfeiture of fees Eligible for round 3
locked
If wants to Forfeiture of advance tuition fee and Not eligible for round 3
discontinue after pay discontinuation fee
the stipulated
date and time
If not allotted Eligible for round 3
If allotted Not allowed to vacate seat. Not allowed for further rounds of
and Joined If wants to discontinue, then counseling
forfeit Advance tuition fees and pay
Discontinuation fee
Round 3 If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for stray round
Not joined
If not allotted Eligible for stray vacancy
If not choice
Eligible for stray vacancy
locked
Not allowed to vacate seat.
If allotted If wants to discontinue, then
Not eligible for next one year.
Stray and Joined forfeit Advance tuition fees and pay
vacancy Discontinuation fee
If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for next one year.
Not joined
29
ANNEXURE - I
CERTIFICATE OF NATIVITY IN TAMIL NADU
Certified that Thiru / Selvi / Thirumathi ...................................... S/o,D/o,W/o………………………
residing at ………………........................…………………............................................... an applicant for
seeking admission to MD Yoga and Naturopathy in Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
College/Institution in Tamil Nadu, is a Native of Tamil Nadu.
Signature: Signature:
Name and Designation:
Station :
Office seal
Date :
Note :
1. This certificate should be issued by an officer of the Revenue Department not below the rank
of Tahsildar of the Taluk concerned.
2. This Certificate should not be issued by the Special Tahsildars, Deputy Tahsildars such as
Loans, Land Acquisition, Election, Excise HQs Deputy Tahsildars, Special Deputy Collectors,
Assistance Commissioner of Agricultural Income, Excise, Elections etc.
3. Any foreign national irrespective of the period of study in the State will not become eligible to
apply for this course. No certificate of Nativity in the State of Tamil Nadu should therefore be
issued to Nationals of other countries for this purpose.
4. The certificate should bear the stamp of the office of the officer signing the certificate. The
certifying officers should insist upon clear proof of the Nativity of the parent or guardian of the
candidate and satisfy themselves on the genuineness of the residential qualification. They
should be particularly careful in the case of candidates whose mother tongue is not Tamil and
whose place of birth is other than Tamil Nadu.
30
5. Permanent Residence Certificate will not be considered as Nativity Certificate.
6. The guidelines prescribed for the issue of Nativity Certificate and they are as follow as per Lr.
No. R.A.V (B) – 16932/2000, dated 3.4.2000 of the Special Commissioner and Commissioner
of Revenue Administration, Chepauk, Chennai - 5.
(a) The parents / guardians of the applicants / students or the applicant themselves should
have permanently resided continuously for a period of 5 years in Tamil Nadu.
(b) Permanently residing for a period of 5 years should be supported by documentary
evidence.
(c) The family ration card, Electoral Roll, census list if taken recently, documents like
sale deed, tax receipt etc. relating to the property owned by either of the parents or by the
applicant may be verified.
(d) The Transfer Certificate issued by the school authorities where the applicant had
studied last may be verified to know whether he / she was in the state for 7 years.
(e) Enquiry in the village / place of residence of the neighbor / Village Administrative
Officers regarding continuous residing.
(f) To ensure that wrong or incorrect address had not been furnished to obtain the certificate.
(g) The birth place of the parent, place of the residence of the parent / father, permanent
assets, mother tongue, place of education, place of marriage of the applicant / parents, the
period of stay in and outside Tamil Nadu can also be considered before issuing
certificate.
31
ANNEXURE - II
SERVICE PROFORMA
The service particulars of Dr ................................................................................ S/o. D/o.
W/o. Thiru................................................................... who is an applicant for admission to
M.D., (Yoga and Naturopathy) Course 2025-2026 session are hereby furnished.
1. Designation of the Present Post. :
2. Service Status (Tick Appropriate Box) :
Approved Panchayat Undertakings / Organization of
Probationer GOI service
Probationer Union service GOI / GOTN
3. Date of First Appointment in TNMS / :
GOI / Panchayat
4. Duration of Service as on 31.07.2025 :
5. Details of posts held and place of service :
Duration
Post Held Nature of Service Place
From To
(If space is not sufficient, separate sheet indicating the above particulars should be enclosed with
Signature and office seal of the competent forwarding authority)
6. If the candidate is under any subsisting :
Contractual obligation to the Government for any
Reason, then details.
7. Are there any Criminal Proceedings, Inquiry or :
Disciplinary Proceedings pending or
Contemplated against the candidate? If so,
application should not be forwarded.
8. Whether the candidate has produced an :
undertaking as mentioned in prospectus Section
III - para 13.
9. Whether he Candidate has worked in a hilly area? :
32
If so, the details of duration of service and with
the place of posting etc. may be furnished. The
leave if any, except Casual Leave, shall be
excluded
Station: Signature:
Date: Office Seal:
Note: All applicants should obtain service certificate from the competent authority
Registrations without Service Particulars duly authenticated by the competent authority are
liable for rejection. Candidates above 50 years as on 31.07.2025 are not eligible to apply.
33
ANNEXURE - III
DISCIPLINE DECLARATION BY THE CANDIDATE
I________________________ undersigned, a student selected for admission
to___________________________________ course in Government Yoga & Naturopathy
Medical College, Chennai / International Institute of Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
Sciences, Chengalpattu do hereby agree to confirm from this date, I will follow the rules
and regulations including those relating to the Hostel laid down or to be laid down
hereafter by the Principal of the college for the time being for the due maintenance of
discipline at the said college and I assured that I will not join any agitation/strike of any
kind during the course of study. I further agree to make good when called upon to do so to
the Government of Tamil Nadu any damage to furniture, apparatus or other articles which
may be caused by any carelessness, negligence wantonly on my part.
2. I will not indulge or participate in any kind of ragging and if found to have
indulged in ragging in the past or noticed later, I am aware that I will be removed from
the roll of the institution at whatever stage of study and criminal action will be taken
against me.
Signature of Candidate’s Parent/Guardian Signature of the Applicant
34
Annexure - IV
Declaration for unauthorized absence by the Candidate
I, Dr.
S/o D/o/ W/o ____________________________________________________do hereby
solemnly declare that if I immediately on joining the course abstain unauthorisedly from
attending class for one month or more, I agree that, I may be considered as discontinued
without notice on automatic basis and the vacancy that may arise may be filled up from
the waiting list depending upon the availability of time before the prescribed cut-off date
by the Selection committee for P.G. [MD (Yoga and Naturopathy] Courses.
Signature of the Candidate
35
Annexure – V
CERTIFICATE OF DISABILITY
(As per Government of India Gazette Notification No.93, dated: 16.02.2022),
For admission to M. D. YOGA & NATUROPATHY
Recent
Passport Size
Photograph of
Certificate No………………….. Date……………… the candidate
duly attested by
Name of the Designated Disability Centre (as per annexure): the issuing
authority.
This is to certify that Dr. / Mr. / Ms. /
……………………….………………………. aged …… Years, Son / Daughter
of Thiru ………………………………………. Residing at
…………………………............................................................................................
………………………………………………………………..……………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
has the following Disability (Name of the Specified Disability)
…………………………………………………………. (in percentage) of ….……………………
(in words)………………………..( in figure) .
• Please tick on the “Specified Disability”
(Assessment may be done on the basis of Gazette of India. Extraordinary, Part-III, Section
4) similar to MCI notification.
Sl. Disability Type of Specified Disability Range
No. Category Disabilities Disability (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) Eligible for MD - Eligible for MD - Not Eligible
Yoga & Yoga & Naturopathy for
Naturopathy Programme, Programme
Programme, Eligible for PwD
Not Eligible for Quota
PwD Quota
1. Physical (A) Locomotor (a) Leprosy Less than 40-80% disability More than
36
Disability Disability, cured 40% Person with more 80%
including person* disability than 80% disability
Specified (b) Cerebral may also be
Disabilities (a Palsy** allowed on case to
to f). (c) Dwarfism case basis and their
(d) Muscular function a
Dystrophy incompetency will
(e) Acid the aid of assistive
attack victims devices, if it is
(f) Other* being used, to see if
** such as its is brought
Amputation, below 80% and
Poliomyelitis, whether they
etc. possess sufficient
motor ability as
required to pursue
and complete the
programme
satisfactorily.
* Attention should be paid to loss of sensations in fingers and
hands, amputation, as well as involvement of eyes and
corresponding recommendations be looked at.
** Attention should be paid to impairment of vision, hearing,
cognitive function etc. and corresponding recommendations be
looked at.
*** Both hands intact, with intact sensations, sufficient strength
and range of motion are essential to be considered eligible for MD -
YOGA & NATUROPATHY programme.
(B) Visual (a) Blindness Less than Equal to or
Impairment (*) 40% disability More than
(b) Low vision (i.e. 40%
Category ‘0 Disability
(10%)’ I (i.e.
(20%)’ Category III
& II (30%) and above)
(C) Hearing (a) Deaf Less than Equal to or
Impairment @ (b) Hard of 40% more than
hearing Disability 40%
Disability
(*) Persons with Visual impairment/ visual disability of more than
40% may be made eligible to pursue Graduate MD - YOGA &
NATUROPATHY. Education and may be given reservation,
subject to the condition that the visual disability is brought to a
level of less than the benchmark of 40% with advanced low vision
aids such as telescopes / magnifier etc.
37
@ Persons with hearing disability of more than 40% may e made
eligible to pursue Graduate MD - YOGA & NATUROPATHY.
Education and may be given reservation, subject to the condition
that the hearing disability is brought to a level of less than the
benchmark of 40% with the aid of assistive devices.
In addition to this, the individual should have a speech
discrimination score of more than 60%.
(D) Speech & Organic/ Less than Equal to or
language neurological 40% more than
disability causes Disability 40%
Disability
It is proposed that for admission to MD - YOGA & NATUROPATHY. programme
the Speech Intelligibility Affected (SIA) score shall not exceed 3 (Which will
correspond to less than 40%) to be eligible to pursue the MD - YOGA &
NATUROPATHY. programme. The individuals beyond this score will not be
eligible for admission to the MD - YOGA & NATUROPATHY. programme.
Persons with an Aphasia Quotient (AQ) up to 40% may be eligible to pursue MD -
YOGA & NATUROPATHY. programme but beyond that they will neither be
eligible to pursue the MD - YOGA & NATUROPATHY. programme nor will they
have any reservation.
. Intellectual (a) Specific # currently there is no Quantification scale
disability learning available to assess the severity of SpLD, therefore
disabilities the cut-off of 40% is arbitrary and more evidence is
(Perceptual needed.
disabilities, Less than Equal to or more
Dyslexia, 40% than 40% disability
Dyscalculia, Disability But selection will be
Dyspraxia & based on the learning
Developmenta competency
l aphasia)# evaluated with the
help of the
remediation /
assisted technology /
aids / infrastructural
changes by the
Expert Panel.
(b) Autism Absence or Currently not Equal to or
spectrum Mild recommended due more
disorders Disability, to lack of objective than60%
38
Asperser method to establish disability
syndrome presence and extent or presence
(disability of of mental illness. of cognitive
40-60% as However, the /intellectual
per ISAA) benefit of disability and
where the reservation/quota or if the
individual is may be considered person is
deemed fit in future after deemed unfit
for MD - developing better for pursuing
YOGA & methods of MD - YOGA
NATUROPA disability &
THY assessment. NATUROP
programme ATHY
by an expert programme
panel by an expert
panel.
3. Mental Mental illness Absence or Currently not Equal to or
Behaviour mild recommended due more than
Disability: to lack of objective 40%
less than 40% method to establish disability or
(under presence and extent if the person
IDEAS) of mental illness. is deemed
However, the unfit to
benefit of perform
reservation/quota hi/her duties.
may be considered Standards
in future after may be
developing better drafted for
methods of the definite
disability of “fitness to
assessment. practice
medicine”
as are used
by several
institutions
of countries
other than
India.
4. Disability (a) Chronic (i) Multiple Less than 40% 80% More than
caused due to Neurological Sclerosis 40% disability 80%
Conditions Disability
(ii)
Parkinsonism
(b) Blood (i) Less than 40% 80% More than
Disorders Haemophilia 40% disability 80%
39
Disability
(ii)
Thalassemia
(iii) sickle cell
disease
5. Multiple More than one Must consider all above while deciding in
disabilities of the above individual cases recommendations with respect to
including deaf specified presence any of the above, namely, visual,
blindness disabilities Hearing, Speech & Language disability,
Intellectual Disability, and Mental Illness as a
component of Multiple Disability.
Combining formula as notified by the related
Gazette Notification issued by the Government of
India
a+b (90-a)
90
(where a=higher value of disability % and
b=lower value of disability % as calculated for
different disabilities)
Is recommended for computing the disability
arising when more than one disabling condition is
present in a given individual. This formula may be
used in cases with multiple disabilities, and
recommendations regarding admission and/or
reservation made as per the specific disabilities
present in a given individual
Note: For selection under PwD category, candidates will be required to produce Disability Certificate before
their schedule date of counselling from one of the disability assessment boards as designated by
concerned Authority of Government of India.
• Conclusion: He/She is Eligible/Not Eligible for admission in Indian
Medicine courses as per the CCIM Gazette Notification subject to his being
otherwise medically fit.
•Functional competency with the aid of Assistive devices in case of
Locomotor*/Visual*/Hearing*Impairment, if any
40
Sign. & Name Sign. &Name Sign. &Name
(Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist)
Note:
1. The selected candidates have to undergo a second medical examination by a medical board
constituted for the purpose by the Director of Medical Education to ascertain and confirm the
nature and extent of physically disability.
2. The decision of the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy in this regard will be
final.
41
ANNEXURE - VI
AGREEMENT BOND FOR CANDIDATES ADMITTED TO
M.D. YOGA & NATUROPATHY COURSE 2025-2026 SESSION
THIS DEED OF BOND IS EXECUTED AT________________________ ON THIS DAY OF
_______________ BY
Name:___________________________
S/O, D/O, W/O _____________________
Residing At (Permanent Address):________________________
(Temporary Address):_________________________
Land Line Phone No:____________
Mobile No:______________________
email id:__________________________
AADHAR NO.____________________
IN FAVOUR OF GOVERNMENT YOGA AND NATUROPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGE,CHENNAI-
106. / INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOGA AND NATUROPATHY MEDICAL SCIENCES,
CHENGALPATTU- 603001.
WHEREAS the Party of the FIRST PART have applied for admission to M.D. Yoga & Naturopathy course
and the Party of the FIRST PART has been selected to the said course.
As per the Prospectus, the Party of the FIRST PART has agreed to serve the Government of Tamil Nadu
till superannuation (For Service Candidates) / for a period not less than__________ years (For Non Service
Candidates) after successful completion of the M.D. Yoga & Naturopathy course and on such failure of not
completing the full bond period of years, the Party of the FIRST PART shall forthwith pay a sum of
Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only).
During the above period, the Party of the FIRST PART (For Non Service Candidates) shall be paid
Stipend and the Government of Tamil Nadu will request their services within a period of 2 years from the date
of completion of the M.D. Yoga & Naturopathy course.
AND WHEREAS for the better protection of the Government, the Party of the FIRST PART has agreed
to execute the bond with 3 sureties who are Income Tax assesses to stand guarantee for the above said amount
of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only).
AND WHEREAS the Party of the FIRST PART have also agreed that his/ her certificates relating to
M.D. Yoga & Naturopathy course will not be given to the Party of the FIRST PART unless the Party of the
42
FIRST PART successfully completes the bond period of ______________ years or pay to the Governor of
Tamil Nadu his successors and assignees (hereinafter called “ The Government”) on demand the sum of
Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only).
The Party of the FIRST PART__________________________ or his/ her legal heirs, executors and
administrators shall forthwith pay to the Government on demand the said sum of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten
Lakhs only).
AND WHEREAS the Government have , at the request of the Party of the FIRST PART
___________________________ employed as ___________________ granted stipend to him / her for a period
of 36 months with effect from ___________ in order to enable him/ her to study at ________________
________________________________ College.
AND WHEREAS if the Party of the FIRST PART __________________________________________
works for a period of less than 36 months during the M.D. Yoga & Naturopathy course /
_________________, the proportionate amount will be treated as stipend and the Party of the FIRST PART
________________________ shall pay back in addition to the security amount of Rs.__________________/ -
(Rupees_______________ Lakh only) with the balance amount of stipend to the Government.
AND WHEREAS if the Party of the FIRST PART________________________________ discontinues
the course at any time before the completion of the M.D. Yoga & Naturopathy course the Party of the FIRST
PART shall pay back in total, amount received as stipend in addition to the discontinuation fee of
Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only).
AND upon the Party of the FIRST PART _____________________ or
1._____________________________or 2.________________________ or
3.______________________
The sureties aforesaid making such payment, the above written bond shall be void and be of no effect, otherwise
it shall remain in force and virtue.
[
PROVIDED always that the liability of the sureties hereunder shall not be impaired or discharged by
reasonable time being granted or by any forbearance, act or omission of the Government or any person
authorized by them (Whether with or without the consent knowledge of the sureties) nor shall it be necessary
for the Government to sue the Party of the FIRST PART before suing the sureties
43
1.__________________________________________________
2___________________________________________ and
3._________________________________
Or any of them for amount due hereunder.
This bond shall in all respects be Governed by the Laws of India, for the time being in force, and the
rights and liabilities shall, where necessary, be accordingly determined by the appropriate courts in India.
This bond is exempted from stamp duty, under Article 57 of Schedule- I of the Indian Stamp Act , 1899.
(Central Act II of 1899 )
NOW THE DEED OF INDEMNITY BOND WITNESSESS AS FOLLOWS:
1. The Party of the FIRST PART has agreed to serve the Government of Tamil Nadu Medical Services for a
period of ____________________ on successful completion of the M.D. Yoga & Naturopathy course
at___________________________________ and in the event of default the Party of the FIRST PART shall pay
forthwith a sum of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only).to the Government of Tamil Nadu Medical
Services.
2. For the aforesaid amount Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only). the Party of the FIRST PART has
brought 3 sureties and it should stand alive till successful completion of the ________years bond period with
the Government by the Party of the FIRST PART. Or in the event of such default till payment of Rs.10,00,000/-
(Rupees Ten Lakhs only) is paid to the Government of Tamil Nadu Medical Services.
3. The Party of the FIRST PART agrees that till the successful completion of the period of __________years
service to the Government of Tamil Nadu or till the payment of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) is
paid the certificates relating to M.D. Yoga & Naturopathy course at________________________________
shall be in the custody of the Party of the Second Part College and the Government has a first lien over all the
certificates gained by the candidate at the time of admission.
The Party of FIRST PART authorizes for retention of the certificates till the lien is cleared / discharged.
Signed and Dated at _____________ on this the ____________day of _____________.
Signed and delivered by the Party of the FIRST PART _______________.
Signature of the Candidate:
PAN No. of Surety 1 :
Aadhar No.
44
Signed and delivered by the Surety _______________________________
Signature of the Surety with seal.
In the presence of :
Witness 1. Witness 2
Name: Name:
Address: Address:
Signature Signature
PAN No. of Surety 2 :
Aadhar No.
Signed and delivered by the Surety _______________________________
Signature of the Surety with seal.
In the presence of :
Witness 1. Witness 2
Name: Name:
Address: Address:
Signature Signature
PAN No. of Surety 3 :
Aadhar No.
Signed and delivered by the Surety _______________________________
Signature of the Surety with seal.
In the presence of :
Witness 1. Witness 2
Name: Name:
Address: Address:
Signature Signature
ACCEPTED
For and on behalf of any of the order and direction of the Government of Tamil Nadu.
Date :
Station :
Principal
Government Yoga & Naturopathy Medical College, Chennai / Chengalpattu.
45
LIST OF ANNEXURES
ANNEXURES Name
Annexure - I Certificate of Nativity of Tamil Nadu
Annexure -, II Service Proforma
Annexure - III Discipline Declaration by the Candidate
Annexure – IV Declaration for Unauthorized Absence by the Candidate
Annexure - V Certificate of Disability
Annexure - VI Agreement Bond
46
LIST OF COMMUNITIES
2025-2026
LIST SHOWING THE SCHEDULED CASTES,
SCHEDULED TRIBES, BACKWARD CLASSES,
BACKWARD CLASS-MUSLIMS,
MOST BACKWARD CLASSES AND
DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
IN THE
STATE OF TAMILNADU
LIST OF COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE OF TAMILNADU
LISTOF BACKWARD CLASSES, MOST BACKWARD CLASSES, DENOTIFIED
COMMUNITIES THROUGH OUT THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU UNLESS AND
OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
47
1. G.O.Ms.No.85 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 29.7.2008
2. G.O.Ms.No.96, Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 8.9.2008
3. G.O.Ms.No.97 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 11.9.2008
4. G.O.Ms.No.37 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 21.5.2009
5. G.O.Ms.No.98 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 5.1.2009.
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASSES
Sl.No Name of the Caste
1. Agamudayar including Thozhu or Thuluva Vellala
2. AgaramVellan Chettiar
3. Alwar, Azhavar and Alavar(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk
of Tirunelveli District.)
4. Servai (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Pudukottai Districts.)
5. Nulayar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli
District)
6. Archakarai Vellala
7. Aryavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli
District)
8. Ayira Vaisyar
9. Badagar
10. Billava
11. Bondil
12. Boyas (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The
Nilgiris, Salem, Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts).
PeddaBoyar (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai Districts) Oddars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur,
Pudukottai, Madurai,Theni and Dindigul Districts)
Kaloddars (except Kancheepuram, Chegalpattu, Tiruvallur,
48
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Pudukkottai, Tiruchirappalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli,
Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
Nellorepet oddars (except Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts) Sooramari oddars (except Salem and Namakkal Districts)
13 Chakkala (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts)
14. Chavalakarar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
15. Chettuor Chetty (including Kottar Chetty, ElurChetty, Pathira Chetty, Valayal
Chetty, Pudukadai Chetty)(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tenkasi District)
16. Chowdry
16(A) Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Castes irrespective of the generation
of conversion (except the Paravar conversion to Christianity of Kanniyakumari
District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District) for the purpose of
reservation of seats in Educational Institutions and for seats in Public
Services.
16(B). C.S.I formerly S.I.U.C (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk
of Tenkasi District)
17. Donga Dasaris (except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and
Namakkal Districts.
18. Devangar,Sedar
19. Dombs (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur and Ariyalur
Districts)
Dommars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Thiruvannamalai Districts)
20. Enadi
21. Ezhavathy (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
49
22. Ezhuthachar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
23. Ezhuva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
24. Gangavar
25. Gavara, Gavarai and Vadugar (Vaduvar) (other than Kamma, Kapu, Balija and
Reddi)
26. Gounder
27. Gowda (including Gammala, Kalali and Anuppa Gounder)
28. Hegde
29. Idiga
30. Illathu Pillaimar, Illuvar, Ezhuvar and Illathar
31. Jhetty
32. Jogis (Except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul, Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
Tiruvannamalai Districts)
33. Kabbera
34 Kaikolar, Sengunthar
35. Kaladi(exceptSivaganga,Virudhunagar,Ramanathapuram,Madurai,Theni,
Dindigul,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
36. Kalari Kurup including Kalari Panicker (in Kanniyakumari District and
Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
37. Kalingi
38. Kallar, Easanattu Kallar , Gandharva Kottai Kallars (except Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Tiruvarur, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai
Districts).
Kootappal Kallars (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur
and Ariyalur Districts)
Piramalai Kallars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram,
Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur Districts) Periyasooriyur Kallars (except
50
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
39. Kallar Kula Thondaman
40. Kalveli Gounder
41. Kambar
42. Kammalar or Viswakarma, Viswakarmala (including Thattar, Porkollar,
Kannar, Karumar, Kollar, Thacher, Kal Thacher, Kamsala and Viswa
brahmin.)
43. Kani, Kanisu, Kaniyar Panicker
44. Kaniyala Vellalar
45. Kannada Saineegar, Kannadiyar (Throughout the State) and
Dasapalanjika (Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur and the Nilgiris Districts)
46. Kannadiya Naidu
47. Karpoora Chettiar
48. Karuneegar (Seer Karuneegar, Sri Karuneegar, Sarattu Karuneegar,
Kaikatti Karuneegar, Mathuvazhi Kanakkar, Sozhi Kanakkar and
Sunnambu Karuneegar)
49. Kasukkara Chettiar
50. Katesar, Pattamkatti
51. Kavuthiyar
52. Kerala Mudali
53. Kharvi
54. Khatri
55. Kongu Vaishnava
56. Kongu Vellalars( including Vellala Gounder, Nattu Gounder, Narambukkatti
Gounder, Tirumudi Vellalar, Thondu Vellalar, Pala Gounder, Poosari
Gounder, Anuppa Vellala Gounder, Padaithalai Gounder, Chendalai
Gounder, Pavalankatti Vellala Gounder, Palavellala Gounder, Sanku
Vellala Gounder and Rathinagiri Gounder).
57. Koppala Velama
58. Koteyar
59. Krishnavaka (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
51
District)
60. Kudikara Vellalar
61. Kudumbi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
62. Kuga Vellalar
63. Kunchidigar
63(A) Latin Catholics except Latin Catholic Vannar in Kanniyakumari District.
63(B) Lathin Catholics in Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
64. Lambadi
65. Lingayat (Jangama)
66. Mahratta (Non-Brahmin)(including Namdev Mahratta)
67. Malayar
68. Male
69. Maniagar
70. Maravars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinum , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli and
Toothukudi Districts) Karumaravars, Appanad Kondayam kottai Maravar
(except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni and
Dindigul Districts.)
Sembanad Maravars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, and
Ramanathapuram Districts)
71. Moondrumandai Enbathunalu (84) Ur.Sozhia Vellalar
72. Mooppan
73. Muthuraja, Muthiriyar, Muttiriyar, Mutharaiyar
74. Nadar, Shanar and Gramani including Christian Nadar, Christian Shanar
and Christian Gramani.
75. Nagaram
76. Naikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
77. Nangudi Vellalar
78. Nanjil Mudali (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
52
79. Odar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
80. Odiya
81. Oottruvalanattu Vellalar
82. O.P.S.Vellalar
83. Ovachar
84. Paiyur Kotta Vellalar
85. Pamulu
86. Panar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
86A Pandiya Vellalar
87 -Omitted-
88. Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District
89. Pannirandam Chettiar or Uthama Chettiar
90. Parkavakulam (including Surithimar, Nathamar, Malayamar, Moopanar and
Nainar)
91. Perike (including Perike Balija)
92. Perumkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
93. Podikara Vellalar
94. Pooluva Gounder
95. Poraya
96. Pulavar (in Coimbatore and Tiruppur Districts)
97. Pulluvar or Pooluvar
98. Pusala
99. Reddy (Ganjam)
100. Sadhu Chetty (including Telugu Chetty, Twenty four Manai Telungu Chetty)
101. Sakkaravar or Kavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tenkasi District )
102. Salivagana
103. Saliyar, Padmasaliyar, Pattusaliyar, Pattariyar and Adhaviyar
104. Savalakkarar
53
105. Senaithalaivar, Senaikudiyar and Illaivaniar
105A Serakula Vellalar
106. Sourashtra (Patnulkarar)
107. Sozhiavellalar (including Sozha Vellalar, Vetrilaikarar, Kodikalkarar and
Keeraikarar)
108. Srisayar
109. Sundaram Chetty
109A Thiyya
110. Thogatta Veerakshatriya
111. Tholkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
112. Tholuva Naicker and Vetalakara Naicker
113 -Omitted-
114. Thoriyar
115. Ukkirakula Kshatriya Naicker
116. Uppara, Uppillia and Sagara
117. Urali Gounder ( except Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai District) and Orudaya Gounder or Oorudaya Gounder (in
Madurai ,Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Salem and Namakkal Districts )
118. Urikkara Nayakkar
118A Virakodi Vellala
119 Vallambar
119. Vallanattu Chettiar
A
120. Valmiki
121. Vaniyar, Vania Chettiar (including Gandla, Ganika, Telikula and Chekkalar)
122. Veduvar and Vedar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tenkasi District where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
123. Veerasaiva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
124. Velar
54
125. Vellan Chettiar
126. Veluthodathu Nair (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tenkasi District)
Vokkaligar (including Vakkaligar, Okkaligar, Kappiliyar, Kappiliya, Okkaliga
127.
Gowda, Okkaliya- Gowder, Okkaliya Gowda )
128. Wynad Chetty (The Nilgiris District)
Yadhava (including Idaiyar, Telugu Speaking Idaiyar known as Vaduga Ayar or
129.
Vaduga Idaiyar or Golla and Asthanthra Golla)
130. Yavana
131. Yerukula
Converts to Christianity from any Hindu Backward Classes Community or
Most Backward Classes Community or Denotified Communities (except
131A
the Converts to Christianity from Meenavar, Parvatharajakulam,
Pattanavar, Sembadavar, Mukkuvar or Mukayar and Paravar)
Orphans and destitute children who have lost their parents before reaching
the age of ten and are destitutes; and who have nobody else to take care of
132. them either by law or custom; and also who are admitted into any of the
schools or orphanages run by the Government or recognized by the
Government.
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASS MUSLIMS
1. Ansar
2. Dekkani Muslims
3. Dudekula
4. Labbais including Rowthar and Marakayar (whether their spoken language is
Tamil or Urdu)
5. Mapilla
6. Sheik
7. Syed
55
LIST OF MOST BACKWARDS CLASSES COMMUNITIES
1 Ambalakarar
2 Andipandaram
2(A) Arayar (in Kanniyakumari District)
3 Bestha, Siviar
4 Bhatraju (other than Kshatriya Raju)
5 Boyar, Oddar
6 Dasari
7 Dommara
8 Eravallar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District where the community is a Scheduled Tribe )
9 Isaivellalar
10 Jambuvanodai
11 Jangam
12 Jogi
13 Kongu Chettiar (in Coimbatore and Erode Districts only)
14 Koracha
15 Kulala (including Kuyavar and Kumbarar)
16 Kunnuvar Mannadi
17 Kurumba, Kurumba Gounder
18 Kuruhini Chetty
18(A) Latin Catholic Christian Vannar (in Kanniyakumari District)
19 Maruthuvar, Navithar, Mangala, Velakattalavar, Velakatalanair and
Pronopakari
20 Mond Golla
21 Moundadan Chetty
22 Mahendra, Medara
23 Mutlakampatti
24 Narikoravar (Kurivikars)
56
25 Nokkar
25(A) Panisaivan/Panisivan
Vanniakula Kshatriya (including Vanniyar, Vanniya, Vannia Gounder, Gounder or
26
Kander, Padayachi, Palli and Agnikula Kshatriya)
27 Paravar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District where the Community is a Scheduled Caste)
27A Paravar converts to Christianity including the Paravar converts to
Christianity of Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk in Tenkasi
District.
28 Meenavar (Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar) (including converts
to Christianity )
29 Mukkuvar or Mukayar (including converts to Christianity)
30 Punnan Vettuva Gounder
31 Pannayar (other than Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District)
32 Sathatha Srivaishnava (including Sathani, Chattadi and Chattada
Srivaishnava)
33 Sozhia Chetty
34 Telugupatty Chetty
35 Thottia Naicker ( including Rajakambalam, Gollavar, Sillavar, Thockalavar
, Thozhuva Naicker and Erragollar)
36 Thondaman
36(A) Thoraiyar (Nilgris)
36(B) Thoraiyar (Plains)
36(C) Transgender or Eunuch (Thirunangai or Aravani)
37 Valaiyar (including Chettinad Valayars)
38 Vannar (Salavai Thozhilalar)(including Agasa, Madivala, Ekali, Rajakula,
Veluthadar and Rajaka) (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah
Taluk of Tenkasi District where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
39 Vettaikarar
40 Vettuva Gounder
41 Yogeeswarar
57
LIST OF DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
1 Attur Kilnad Koravars (Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore, Villupuram, kallakurichi,
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga and Virudhunagar Districts)
2 Attur Melnad Koravars (Salem and Namakkal District)
3 Appanad Kondayamkottai Maravar (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar,
Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts )
4 Ambalakarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
5 Ambalakkarar (Suriyanur, Tiruchirapalli District)
6 Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris,
Salem, Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts)
7 Battu Turkas
8 C.K.Koravars (Cuddalore, Villupuram and Kallakurichi Districts)
9 Chakkala (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and the Nilgiris Districts)
10 Changyampudi Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts)
11 Chettinad Valayars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
12 Dombs (Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
13 Dobba Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
14 Dommars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
15 Donga Boya
16 Donga Ur.Korachas
17 Devagudi Talayaris
18 Dobbai Korachas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts )
19 Dabi Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
58
Tiruvannamalai Districts )
20 Donga Dasaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
21 Gorrela Dodda Boya
22 Gudu Dasaris
23 Gandarvakottai Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Cuddalore, Villupuram
and
Kallakurichi Districts)
24 Gandarvakottai Kallars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai,
Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts)
25 Inji Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
26 Jogis (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Chennai, Cuddalore,
Villupuram, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
27 Jambavanodai
28 Kaladis (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts )
29 Kal Oddars (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
30 Koravars (Kancheepuram , Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Pudukottai,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Thiravarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur,
Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukadi, Chennai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and
The Nilgiris Districts )
31 Kalinji Dabikoravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur
and Pudukottai Districts)
32 Kootappal Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai Districts)
59
33 Kala Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
34 Kalavathila Boyas
35 Kepmaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts )
36 Maravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi and
Toothukudi
Districts)
37 Monda Koravars
38 Monda Golla (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
39 Mutlakampatti (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalaur and Pudukottai
Districts)
40 Nokkars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
41 Nellorepet Oddars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
42 Oddars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts)
43 Pedda Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
44 Ponnai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
45 Piramalai Kallars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai,
Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and
Tiruvarur Districts)
46 Peria Suriyur Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalurand
Pudukottai Districts)
47 Padayachi (Vellayan Kuppam in Cuddalore District and Tennore in Tiruchirapalli
District )
48 Punnan Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai Districts )
49 Servai (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
50 Salem Melnad Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode,
60
Tiruppur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Salem,
Namakkal, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
51 Salem Uppu Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
52 Sakkaraithamadai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
Tiruvannamalai Districts)
53 Saranga Palli Koravars
54 Sooramari Oddars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
55 Sembanad Maravars (Sivaganga, Virudunagar and Ramanathapuram
Districts)
56 Thalli Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
57 Telungapatti Chetis (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai Districts)
58 Thottia Naickers (Sivaganga , Virudunagar, Ramanathapuram,
Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur,
Pudukottai, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem, Namakkal, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet, Tiruvannamalai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
59 Thogamalai Koravars or Kepmaris (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
60 Uppukoravars or Settipalli Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam ,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
61 Urali Gounders (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
62 Wayalpad or Nawalpeta Korachas
63 Vaduvarpatti Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
64 Valayars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur Pudukottai, Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
61
65 Vettaikarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and
Pudukottai Districts)
66 Vetta Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
67 Varaganeri Koravars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai Districts)
68 Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED CASTES)
1 Adi Andhra
2 Adi Dravida
3 Adi Karnataka
4 Ajila
5 Aruthathiyar
6 Ayyanavar (in Kanyakumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli
District)
7 Baira
8 Bakuda
9 Bandi
10 Bellara
11 Bharata (In Kanykumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District.
12 Chakkiliyan
13 Chalavadi
14 Chamar, Muchi
15 Chandala
16 Cheruman
17 Devendrakula Velalar (Devendrakulanathan, Kadaiyan (excluding in the
coastal areas of Tirunalveli, thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai,
Thanjavur, Tiruvarur and Nagapattinam district), Kalladi, Kudumban,
Pallan, Pannadi, Vathiriyan)
62
18 Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano
19 Domban
20 Godagali
21 Godda
22 Gosangi
23 Holeya
24 Jaggali
25 Jambuvulu
26 Kadaiyan (in the districts of Tirunelveli, Thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram,
Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Tiruvarrur and Nagapattinam)
27 Kakkalan (in kanyakumari districts and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
district)
28 -Omitted-
29 Kanakkan, Padanna (in the Nilgiris district)
30 Karimpalan
31 Kavara (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
32 Koliyan
33 Koosa
34 Kootan, Koodan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
district)
35 -Omitted-
36 Kuravan, Sidhanar
37 Madari
38 Madiga
39 Maila
40 Mala
41 Mannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
42 Mavilan
43 Mager
44 Mundala
45 Nalakeyava
63
46 Nayadi
47 Padannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
district)
48 Pagadi
49 -Omitted-
50 Palluvan
51 Pambada
52 Panan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
53 Panchama
54 -Omitted-
55 Panniandi
56 Paraiyan, Parayan, Sambavar
57 Paravan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
58 Pathiyan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
district)
59 Pulayan, Cheramar
60 Puthirai Vannan
61 Raneyar
62 Samagara
63 Samban
64 Sapari
65 Semman
66 Thandan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
district)
67 Thoti
68 Tiruvalluvar
69 Vallon
70 Valluvan
71 Vannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
72 -Omitted-
73 Velan
64
74 Vetan (in Kanyakumari and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
75 Vettiyan
76 Vettuvan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah of Tirunelvelli district)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED TRIBES) TAMILNADU
1. Adiyan
2. Aranadan
3. Eravallan
4. Irular.
5. Kadar
Kammara (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
6.
District).
Kanikaran, Kanikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah and
7.
Ambasamudram taluk of Tirunelveli District).
8. Kaniyan, Kanyan.
9. Kattunayakan.
10. Kochu Velan.
11. Konda Kapus.
12. Kondareddis.
13. Koraga.
14. Kota (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
District).
15. Kudiya, Melakudi.
16. Kurichchan.
17. Kurumbas (in the Nilgiris District).
18. Kurumans.
19. MahaMalasar.
20. MalaiArayan.
21. MalaiPandaram.
65
22. Malai Vedan.
23. Malakkuravan.
24. Malasar.
25. Malayali (in Dharmapuri, Vellore, Pudukottai, Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore,
Tiruvannamalai, Villupuram, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur Districts).
26. Malayakandi.
27. Mannan.
28. Mudugar,Muduvan.
29. Muthuvan.
30. Pallayan.
31. Palliyan.
32. Palliyar.
33. Paniyan.
34. Sholaga.
35. Toda (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
District).
36. Uraly.
66