GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
PROSPECTUS FOR ADMISSION TO
B.N.Y.S. MEDICAL DEGREE COURSE
[BACHELOR OF NATUROPATHY & YOGIC SCIENCES]
GOVERNMENT & GOVERNMENT SURRENDERED SEATS
2025-2026 SESSION
(As per G.O. (D)No.675 / Health and Family Welfare (IM1-2) Dept.,
Dated:26/06/2025 and as amended from time to time).
LAST DATE FOR SUBMISSION OF ONLINE APPLICATION
FORM
08.08.2025 up to 5.00 p.m.
SELECTION COMMITTEE,
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY,
ARIGNAR ANNA GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL OF INDIAN MEDICINE CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI – 600 106.
Phone No: 044-26216244;
Websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org.
1
IMPORTANT DATES
1 Date of Notification 17.07.2025
2 Date of Commencement of online 17.07.2025
application
3 Last date for online submission of 08.08.2025 upto 5:00 P.M.
application
COUNSELLING FOR ALL THE SECRETARY,
4
SPECIAL CATEGORIES: SELECTION COMMITTEE,
IN-PERSON ONLY COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN
MEDICINE & HOMOEOPATHY,
ARIGNAR ANNA GOVERNMENT
HOSPITAL OF INDIAN MEDICINE
CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI – 600 106.
5 Date of declaration of Rank list Will be posted in the official website.
6 Details of counselling
Will be posted in the official website.
7 Official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in ,
www.tnayushselection.org.
8 Helpline Number 044-26216244
2
S. INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CANDIDATES
No.
1. Candidates seeking admission to B.N.Y.S. (Bachelor of Naturopathy and Yogic
Sciences) under Government Quota in Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
College / Institution and Government surrendered seats in Self-Financing Yoga and
Naturopathy Medical Colleges affiliated to the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University, for the academic session 2025-2026 can be accessed the Prospectus
and online application form, from the following official websites:
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org.
2. Application for Tamil Nadu State 2025-2026 BNYS Government Quota in
Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College / Institution and Government
surrendered seats in Self-Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges, can
only be submitted through online website [www.tnayushselection.org] of Selection
Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy. Application
submitted through any other mode will not be entertained.
3. Qualified and eligible candidates are required to register ONLINE website
[www.tnayushselection.org] of the Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy to participate in the counselling process for allotment of
seat. Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
does not allot any seat manually.
4. Before filling up the online Application form, the candidates are advised to download
the prospectus and read all the instructions carefully along with parents/guardians.
5. Candidates are deemed to have read, agreed and accepted this Prospectus and the
terms and conditions of the counselling mentioned in this prospectus for Tamil Nadu
State 2025-2026 BNYS course Government Quota in Government Yoga and
Naturopathy Medical College / Institution and Government surrendered seats in
Self-Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges on completing the online
submission of application form.
6. Candidates are further advised to fill the application form on their own in the official
website [www.tnayushselection.org] of Selection Committee, Commissionerate of
Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy and not through any agent or third party. Any
mistake committed by the candidate will prejudice one’s selection.
3
7. a. The registration fee for the application form is Rs.500/- (Rupees Five Hundred
Only) (non-refundable) and it should be paid through online Bank payment
portal in the website. The candidates applying under Special category for
Children of Ex-Servicemen, Eminent Sports Person, Person with Benchmark
Disability (PwD) and Union territory of India (UTI) should pay an additional fee
of Rs.100/- (non-refundable) for each special category via Bank payment
portal.
b. All Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Caste (Arunthathiyar) / Scheduled Tribe
candidates of Tamil Nadu native are EXEMPTED from payment of the cost of
the application.
c. The last date for submission of online application form will be up to 5:00 P.M.
on 01.08.2025. Thereafter there is no provision for the candidates to submit
their online application form.
d. Candidates should fill up all mandatory columns, upload all required
documents and submit the duly filled in online application. The candidates may
download their filled in online application form and secure a copy of the same
for their future reference. Subsequent submission of supporting document(s),
is not accepted either on courier / post / or in person.
8. a. The candidates applying under Special categories viz., Children of Ex-
servicemen, Eminent Sports Person, Persons with Benchmark Disabilities, and
union Territories of India (UTI) are instructed to submit their application through
online only.
b. At the time of filling the online application Special Category candidates are
required to mention the respective Special Category Code Number as
mentioned in the Annexure-I and upload the necessary supportive documents
as mentioned in the below table.
Type of Special Category Supportive Documents
Children of Ex-Servicemen Annexure-V
Eminent Sports persons Annexure-VI(A)
Persons with Benchmark Disabilities Annexure-VII (with Full Size
Photograph exhibiting the deformity)
c. One candidate can apply a maximum of three Special Categories.
d. For each special category an additional fee of Rs.100/- has to be paid
separately through online bank payment portal.
4
e. Special Category rank differs completely from that of the General Category
rank.
f. Special Category candidates cannot claim the same rank in the General
Category and vice versa.
g. The Counselling for the Special Categories will be done before the General
Category Online Counselling. The candidates have to appear in person along
with the relevant original certificates at the Selection Commission office for all
Special Category Counselling.
h. In case of unavoidable circumstances special category candidate can authorize
his/her parents on his/her behalf for counselling. The parent’s decision will be
binding on the candidates. An authorization letter given by the candidate
submitted by the parents along with the original documents of any one of the
identification proofs such as Voter ID, Driving Licence, Pan Card, Passport,
Aadhar Card etc., of both the parents and the candidates as mentioned in the
ANNEXURE: XIII(a) & XIII(b).
i. The claim under Special Category will not be considered, under any
circumstances without the required documents and the application of such
candidate shall be considered under General Category only, if candidate fulfils
the norms for the General Category.
j. All the special category candidates except eminent sports persons should
submit the hard copy of their online application form along with the relevant
supportive documents to the address mentioned below.
k. Candidates applied under the eminent sports person category will be called in
person (Date and time will be intimated through the Official Website of Selection
Committee) with their original Sports Certificates and relevant documents along
with the hard copy of their online application form for Certificate Verification to
the below mentioned address:
The Secretary,
Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy,
Arignar Anna Government Hospital of Indian Medicine Campus,
Arumbakkam, Chennai – 600 106.
9. a) The candidates are instructed to visit the official websites
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in and www.tnayushselection.org at least twice a day
5
for updates from the date of commencement of online application till the end of
admission process without fail. Further, any changes or modification and relevant
information pertaining to the counselling / admission process will be made
available in the above official website.
b) Selection Committee will not be responsible for consequences resulting due to
non-diligent follow up of notices, notifications and publications appearing on the
website regarding admission to B.N.Y.S. Medical Degree course under
Government Quota seats for the academic year 2025-2026.
10. Provisional Rank list and the online counselling schedule will be uploaded in the
official websites, viz., www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in , www.tnayushselection.org. The
Application Registration Number (A.R. No.) will appear in the provisional rank list.
No Individual communication / Intimation will be made with regard to this.
11. The candidates allotted to B.N.Y.S. course through Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Arumbakkam,
Chennai, will alone be registered for B.N.Y.S. Course in The Tamil Nadu
Dr. M.G.R. Medical University.
12. The Prospectus is applicable for Government seats and Government Surrendered
Seats in the Self-Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges, Tamil Nadu.
13. DURATION OF THE BNYS COURSE:
The duration of BNYS course is five and half years including one year of
Compulsory Rotatory Residential Internship.
14. PAYMENT DETAILS:
Christians
OC/BC/ converted
Description SC/SCA/ST TIME
BCM/MBC from
SC/SCA/ST
Registration fee
for online 500 500 Exempted While applying
application
Special Category 100 100 Exempted While applying
Online Processing
500 500 500 Before choice filling
fee
Advance Tuition Free
At the time of
fee Payment for (If income is less than 2.5
5000 submission of
Government lakhs with valid Income
choice filling.
College Seats. Certificate)
Advance Tuition 10000 Free 1. Rs. 5000 / - at
6
fees for Self- (5000 + (If income is less than 2.5 the time of
Financing 5000) lakhs with valid Income submission of
Colleges under Certificate) choice filling.
Government 2. Rs. 5000/- at the
Surrendered seats time of
downloading
allotment order.
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
Sl. No. PROSPECTUS
I ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: -
1. Candidate should be a citizen of India. Foreign nationals are NOT eligible to
apply for admission to B.N.Y.S. course.
2. NATIVITY:
a) Candidate should be Native of Tamil Nadu.
b) The Candidates who claim their Nativity as Tamil Nadu, should upload their
nativity certificate issued by the competent authority of Government of Tamil
Nadu (ANNEXURE-IV).
c) Candidates belonging to other States and residing in Tamil Nadu cannot
claim nativity of Tamil Nadu.
d) Permanent Residence Certificate in lieu of Nativity Certificate will not be
accepted.
e) Candidates who are Native of Tamil Nadu and have studied from Standard VI
to Standard XII in schools of Tamil Nadu should also produce Nativity
Certificate and Community Certificate issued by the competent authority. The
Community Certificate of either one of the parents obtained from the
competent Revenue Authority of Government of Tamil Nadu should be
enclosed to claim Communal Reservation.
f) If candidate do not submit the above-mentioned certificates and even if
candidate had studied Standard VI to Standard XII completely in Tamil Nadu,
the candidate will be considered under Open Category only.
g) Candidates who are Native of Tamil Nadu, but have studied from VI Standard
to XII Standard outside Tamil Nadu either partly or completely in one or more
States should produce the Nativity Certificate and Community Certificate
7
issued by the competent authority. The Community Certificate of either one of
the parents obtained from the competent Revenue Authority of Government
of Tamil Nadu should be enclosed to claim Communal Reservation.
h) Such candidates applying in the category 2(g) of this prospectus should also
give an undertaking that they have not applied for any Educational Institution
in any other State, claiming the nativity of such State for admission. If it is
found later that the candidate has applied as a native of any other State other
than Tamil Nadu, then the admission will be cancelled at any stage. Further,
even during the course of study if it is subsequently found that any candidate
has produced a false nativity certificate or given a false undertaking, it will
result in expulsion of the candidate from the course and also initiation of
criminal proceedings against the candidate as well as his/her parents as per
provision of the law.
i) Candidates who are native of other States but studied their schooling from VI
Std to XII Std, continuously in Tamil Nadu, have to produce their School
Bonafide Certificate from the School in which candidates studied Std VI to
XII, to be considered under the Open Category.
j) Community Certificate of the candidates or either one of his/her parents
obtained from other States will not be considered for reservation.
NOTE: This nativity clause is subject to the outcome of the Writ Petitions
(W.P.Nos.23656, 23547, 24217, 25565, 28140, 28778, 28779 and 23950 of
2017& 29513 of 2022) pending before the Hon’ble High Court of Madras.
k) Producing false nativity certificate if detected, at any time later during the
course of study will result in expulsion of the candidate and also initiation of
criminal proceedings against the candidate as well as the parents as per law.
3.
AGE LIMIT:
Candidates should have completed the age of Seventeen years on or before
31st December 2025 for admission in the first year of the Course and there is
no upper age limit. Evidence for the age (e.g., Birth Certificate, 10th Mark
Sheet, +2 Mark Sheet, etc.) should be uploaded.
4. COMMUNITY CERTIFICATE:
a) Candidates should produce Community Certificate obtained from the
Revenue authorities of their respective districts with competent jurisdiction as
8
detailed below:
Sl. No. Name of the Community Issuing Authority
Revenue Divisional Officer of their
native place or Sub-Collector of their
Districts (except Chennai) or P.A
1. Scheduled Tribe (ST)
(General) to Collector of Chennai. The
Community Certificate card issued by
Tahsildars upto 11.11.89 is valid.
Scheduled Caste (SC) /
Tahsildar of Native Taluk of the
2. Scheduled Caste
Candidate
Arunthathiyar (SCA)
Backward Class (BC) /
Backward Class Muslim Headquarters Deputy Tahsildar /
(BCM) / Most Backward Zonal Deputy Tahsildar / Deputy
3.
Class (MBC) / Tahsildar (Certificates)
Denotified Communities
(DNC)
b)
The candidature claimed after submission of application without Community
Certificate will be treated only as Open category.
c) If a candidate of Tamil Nadu origin obtains Community Certificate from other
State, candidates will be considered under Open Category only if candidates
fulfil the norms otherwise.
d) If a candidate submits a false / fabricated Community Certificate, Nativity
Certificate or any other Certificate, if it is found at a later point during the
course of the study, it will result in expulsion of the candidate from the course
and also legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated against the
candidate and their parents as per provision of law.
5. EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS:
a) Candidates should have passed in all the subjects of the qualifying
examination of the Higher Secondary Certificate Examination conducted by
9
the Tamil Nadu State Board or any other equivalent Board in the following
group of subjects along with English individually.
(1) Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology (or)
(2) Physics, Chemistry, Biology (or) Biotechnology with any
other subject.
Note: Candidates who have passed in other board of examination (i.e., other
than the Tamil Nadu State Board, CBSE, ISCE) with same subjects should
upload the Eligibility Certificate from The Tamil Nadu Dr. MGR Medical
University at the time of filling the online application, and submit the
migration certificate received from the respective Board / University to the
College at the time of admission.
b) Candidates who have passed the qualifying examinations from National
Institute of Open Schooling* or State Open Schools* or as private
candidates* from recognized State Boards; or with Biology/Biotechnology
as an additional subject shall be allowed but subject to the outcome of
Special Leave Petitions / Appeals filed by the Medical Council of India.
Note: *“The proviso in italics has been a subject matter of challenge before
the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad, Lucknow
Bench and Hon’ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur. The
provisions of the regulations disqualifying recognized Open School Board
candidates and the candidates who have studied Biology/Biotechnology as
an Additional Subject has been struck down”
6. MINIMUM ELIGIBILITY MARKS FOR B.N.Y.S. COURSE IN RESPECT OF ALL
COMMUNITIES: -
Sl. Eligibility Marks (Aggregate of
Categories
No. marks in science subjects)
1. O.C. community 50 %
2. BC / BC (M) communities 45 %
3. MBC / DNC community 40 %
4. SC / SCA / ST communities 35 %
Physically Challenged Category
(Locomotor Disability of Lower Limbs
5. 40 %
alone): OC / BC / BCM / MBC (DNC)
communities
NOTE:
a) In case of candidates who have furnished the mark-sheets of the qualifying
examination, only in GRADES, the minimum marks of the grades alone will
10
be taken into consideration while determining the marks in the Science
subjects of Physics, Chemistry and Biology or Botany and Zoology or Bio-
Technology.
b) Candidates who have submitted marks sheets with GRADES and without
mentioning the range of marks for each grade should obtain the marks
equivalent certificates from the examining authority and attach a certified
copy along with their mark sheet as an enclosure with the application.
c) Normalization method will be adopted for calculating the minimum eligibility
marks for the candidates who have passed any other equivalent examination.
Refer Clause-V (2) for details.
7. INELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
The following categories of candidates are NOT ELIGIBLE to apply for
B.N.Y.S. Course:
a. Candidates who have passed Higher Secondary Certificate Examination in
Vocational Stream, Pre-University Course in Tamil Nadu, and who used
scribe, who did not study English as a subject in Higher Secondary
Certificate Examination.
b. If the candidates of other Universities / Boards (except State Board / CBSE /
ISCE) do not submit the Eligibility Certificate obtained from The Tamil Nadu
Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Guindy, Chennai, then their application will be
summarily rejected.
c. The selection and admission of candidates other than those mentioned in
Clause-5(a) will be provisional subject to recognition of the qualifying
examination by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University under which
the candidate gets admitted. In case, the recognition is not accorded for the
admission of the candidate on any grounds, the provisional admission will
not entitle the candidate for the continuance of the course and the admission
will be stands cancelled.
d. Candidates presently pursuing the B.N.Y.S. Course.
e. Candidate who are native of other States and studied in other States.
8. The list of SPECIAL CATEGORIES WITH THEIR CODE NUMBERS is
furnished in the ANNEXURE – I. If sufficient number of candidates are not
available for allotment against any of the 14 seats in BNYS Course reserved
for the SPECIAL CATEGORIES listed under ANNEXURE – I. The vacant
11
seats will be added to the General Pool of seats and filled up with
candidates from general merit list, applying rule of reservation.
II PROCEDURE FOR FILLING AND SUBMISSION OF ONLINE APPLICATION
FORM:
1.
The candidates are advised to take a print out of the Prospectus from the
official website and read it carefully, along with the parent / guardian before
filling up the online application form for the academic year 2025-2026.
The candidate should log in to the following website: -
www.tnayushselection.org
The application forms will be available online from 17.07.2025 onwards till
08.08.2025up to 5:00 P.M.
a) Candidates have to fill all the mandatory columns in the online application. All
the relevant documents should be uploaded in PDF format. Candidates are
instructed to submit the online application after filling up all the required
fields.
b) Request for change in any particulars after submitting the online application
form shall not be entertained under any circumstances.
c)
Candidates are instructed to upload the following certificates while filling the
online application form and submit.
i. Class X Mark Sheet (both sides of Certificate).
ii. Class XI Mark Sheet (both sides of Certificate).
iii. Class XII (H.S.C.) Mark sheet (both sides of Mark Sheet) or any other
equivalent examination.
iv. Transfer certificate obtained after the completion of H.S.C / equivalent
examination or any other courses.
i. Certificate for proof of study from VI Std. to XII Std. for the candidates
who have studied completely in Tamil Nadu.
ii. Community Certificate (if applicable).
iii. Nativity certificate.
iv. Documents of Parent need to be uploaded for the candidate who claim
their native as Tamil Nadu for communal reservation: -
 Community Certificate of either one of the parents obtained from the
competent Revenue Authority in Tamil Nadu.
12
v. Front Page of the Bank Pass Book or Cancelled Cheque Leaf of the
Candidate/ Parents (for refund purpose).
vi. Ex-Servicemen, Eminent Sports Person, Persons with Benchmark
Disabilities, and union Territory of India (UTI), Special Category
candidates should upload the relevant certificates along with the online
application form.
vii. Valid Income Certificate of parent for the candidates claiming fee
exemption.
viii. Eligibility Certificate obtained from The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University, Guindy, Chennai for the candidate of other Universities /
Boards (except State Board, CBSE, ISCE).
ix. Court orders (if any).
x. Additional supporting documents (if any).
NOTE: After submitting the filled in online application, the candidates are
advised to download their filled in online application form for their future
reference.
2.
All the entries in the online application form should be filled by the candidate
carefully. The candidate should ensure that all information including the
marks in the qualifying examination furnished by the candidate in the
application and the enclosures are true and correct. The candidate is
informed that after proper scrutiny of the application, if the marks furnished by
the candidate in the application are not correct or any other information is
found to be incorrect, then;
a. Candidates will forfeit the admission, no matter at what stage of the
course, at that time
b. Candidates will be debarred from pursuing any other course for a
period of three years
c. Legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated against the
candidate along with their parents/guardian for furnishing false Mark
Sheet / false Community Certificate / false Nativity Certificate.
3.
Even if the candidate is provisionally selected for the BNYS admission but
found to have failed in +1 examination at a later date, the provisional
13
admission of the candidate automatically stands cancelled.
4. Instructions for filling the Online Application Form:
a. The candidate and the parent / guardian must ensure candidates
eligibility criteria before submitting the online application form. The
candidates are instructed to go through the Prospectus carefully and be
clear about all the instructions with regard to the submission of the
online application form.
b. The application form other than the one filled in online mode will not be
accepted, under any circumstances.
5. (i) Candidate should login to the following website to access application
Registration for BNYS Courses 2025-2026 session.
www.tnayushselection.org
Candidate should fill the following particulars in the online application form:
1. Aadhar Number of the Candidate
2. Name of the candidate
3. Name of the Parent / Guardian
4. Permanent Address / Address for communication
5. Mobile No.
6. E-mail ID.
7. Gender
8. Date of Birth
9. Community and Caste details
10. Religion
11. Mother tongue
12. Nationality
13. Nativity
14. Qualifying Examination, name of School Education Board,
group code, number of Attempts in HSC, Year of passing Class VI
to XII/ Equivalent and Undergoing / completed any professional
courses.
15. Medium of instruction
14
16. Marks details
17. State / District of Class VI to XII / Equivalent
18. Special Category
19. Parent Occupation
20. Annual income of the parent / Valid Income Certificate
21. Civic details
22. Native district
23. Eligibility Certificate (If applicable)
24. First Graduate Certificate / details (If applicable)
25. Uploading documents:
a. Passport size photograph of 35mm x 45mm and 50 to 100Kb in
JPEG format (not taken three months prior to submission of
application) must be uploaded in the online application form. It
should be submitted at the time of admission at the allotted
Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College.
b. The candidates should upload their signature (25mm x 60mm
and 10 to 40Kb in JPEG format) in running hand writing in the
online application form. Placing initials as signature is not
acceptable. Writing full name in the box in capital letters would
also not be accepted as signature and the application form
would be rejected.
c. The candidates must ensure that photograph and signature are
uploaded in the respective fields.
(ii) Candidates are instructed to submit only one application form.
(iii) Candidates should ensure that all information entered in the online
application are correct at the time of online submission of application form.
(iv) Incomplete applications and applications not in accordance with
instruction will not be considered and are liable to be rejected. The application
fee once paid will not be refunded.
(v) Submission of online application and remittance of fee would close as per
the schedule given and no request for extension of time shall be entertained.
15
Application once submitted cannot be withdrawn.
III METHOD OF FEE PAYMENT
1) Mode of payment through Debit Card / Credit card / Net banking / UPI
Necessary facilities have been provided for making payment through
payment portal.
2) Candidates must note that mere deduction of fee from the Bank account is
not a proof of fee payment.
3) Check the validity of the Debit card / Credit card and keep everything ready
while logging on to the website for submitting application form. Candidate
should enter the information asked for and make payment through the portal.
4) The advance tuition fee will be refunded to the candidate who has been
allotted a seat and not joined in 1st and 2nd round of counseling, only to the
account whose details are provided along with the application form.
5) The advance Tuition Fees paid to the Selection Committee will be adjusted
towards the Tuition Fee that has to be paid to the College, after the conduct
of Registration Sub-Committee meeting by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M G R
Medical University to get adjusted against the Tuition Fees to be paid by the
candidates whose names are registered by the University.
6) The Candidates who discontinue the course after joining, at any stage within
the cut-off date will forfeit all the fees including the Advance Tuition Fee paid
by him/her.
7) All payments including the advance Tuition Fee will be forfeited if a candidate
who has been allotted a seat in the Round 3 or subsequent Rounds and does
not join the respective institution. Also, the advance Tuition Fee will be
forfeited if the admission gets cancelled due to any reason. E.g., in case, the
candidate gives wrong information at the time of registration and on the basis
of which a seat may be allotted and later cancelled by the Admission
Authorities or at the time of reporting the candidate fails to produce the
required documents (within stipulated time).
IV.
CATEGORIES OF SEATS:
1. The lists of Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College / Institution
and Self-Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges are furnished
with the details of seats available in the ANNEXURE – II and III respectively.
16
Allotments of seats to B.N.Y.S. course in Government College / Institution
and in Self Financing Medical Colleges will be based on the Merit and
following the Rule of Reservation and subject to the availability.
a) CATEGORY I - GOVERNMENT YOGA AND NATUROPATHY MEDICAL
COLLEGE / INSTITUTION:
The seats available for B.N.Y.S. course in the Government Medical
College / Institution.
b) CATEGORY II - GOVERNMENT SURRENDERED SEATS IN SELF-
FINANCING YOGA AND NATUROPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGES:
Government Surrendered Seats and Management Quota Seats of the
Self-Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges are allocated as
follows:
Nature of the Government Quota/ Management
Institution Seats Surrendered to Quota Seats
Govt.
Non-Minority Self-
65% 35%
Financing Institution
Minority Self-Financing
50% 50%
Institution
2. SEATS RESERVED FOR SPECIAL CATEGORIES IN
GOVERNMENT YOGA & NATUROPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGE /
INSTITUTION:
Seats earmarked for the Special Categories will be allotted following the
Horizontal Reservation. The seats will be allotted as per the merit order in
the concerned Special Category and those seats will be deducted in the
concerned compartment (OC, BC, BC(M), MBC / DNC, SC, SC(A), ST) and
the remaining seats will be allotted to the General Category. If no eligible
candidates are available for the seats earmarked under Special Category
those seats will be added to the General Pool and allotment will be made on
merit basis. The other eligibility conditions for admission to BNYS course
will be applicable as in the case of General Category. The list of Special
Categories is furnished in ANNEXURE– I.
(a) SEATS RESERVED FOR CHILDREN OF EX SERVICEMEN
NO. OF SEATS RESERVED: TWO
(One Seat in each of Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College,
17
Chennai and International Institute of Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
Sciences, Chengalpattu).
The candidate should furnish a certificate as prescribed in the Annexure-V
obtained from the competent authority. The Special Committee from the
Directorate of Ex-Servicemen Welfare constituted for this purpose will
scrutinize Certificates submitted by the candidates and the candidate will be
selected on merit basis. [The wards of the Ex-Servicemen applying in
this category will be allotted seats as per the G.O.(D). No.977, H& FW
Dept. dated 01.06.2018 and as amended in G.O.(D). No.882, H& FW
Dept. dated 28.05.2019 and G.O.(D). No.33, H&FW(MCA-1) Dept.
dated.10.01.2022.]
(b) SEATS RESERVED FOR EMINENT SPORTS PERSON
NO. OF SEATS RESERVED: TWO
(One Seat in each of Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College,
Chennai and International Institute of Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
Sciences, Chengalpattu).
 Selection will be done by the Common Committee constituted for this
purpose by the Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu. The mode of
selection will be as per the guidelines given in ANNEXURE – VI.
 Further, with regard to the two seats reserved in BNYS course for Eminent
Sports Person, preference will be given to the candidate with proficiency in
yogasanas sports discipline over the candidates with proficiency in other
sports disciplines if sports points are equal. i.e., (i) In case two or more
candidates’ same sports points, the person having yogasana discipline will
be preferred. (ii) In case two or more candidates proficient in yogasana /
other sports discipline, then the candidate’s cut off mark will be considered
to arrive sports rank.
 The candidates should submit two sets of Self-attested Photostat Copies
of certificates and testimonials of sports evidence along with application
(one set will be transmitted to the Common Committee, Sports
Development Authority of Tamil Nadu) to the Selection Committee of
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai-106 in
person on or before the last date prescribed for submission of application.
18
Scrutiny of the Sports Certificate will be made by the Common Committee,
Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu. Decision of the Common
Committee shall be final.
 Candidates are requested to arrange the certificates in chronological order
starting from June 2021 as given in the ANNEXURE -VI (A) and submit
along with the application in person. All the particulars are to be filled up
as per the guidelines given in the ANNEXURE- VI. The other eligibility
conditions for admission to BNYS course will be applicable as in the case
of General Category.
(c) SEATS RESERVED FOR DIFFERENTLY ABLED:
NO. OF SEATS RESERVED: EIGHT (3 Seats in Government Yoga and
Naturopathy Medical College, Chennai and 5 seats in International Institute of
Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Sciences, Chengalpattu).
NO. OF SEATS RESERVED
(i) 5% of the total number of seats available in Government Medical
Institutions are reserved for the candidates with benchmark disability.
(ii) The reservation for this category is based on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Act, 2016, Clause 32 (1).
(iii) Candidates with disability of 40-80% shall be considered eligible to
apply for B.N.Y.S. The other conditions for admission into B.N.Y.S.
courses will be applicable as in the case of the General Category.
(iv) Candidates with less than 40% disability are not eligible for
reservation but eligible for General Category.
(v) Candidates are requested to produce a certificate from the District
Medical Board of the district concerned constituted for this purpose
assessing the nature and the extent of physical disability in the format
prescribed in the ANNEXURE –VII. The candidate must have
obtained the certificate within 3 months prior to submission of the
application for seeking admission under this category. If the
certificate has been obtained earlier, the application will be rejected.
The candidates seeking admission under this category should
produce the full-size photograph exhibiting the deformity.
Note:
19
1. The Selected Candidates for BNYS Course will be required to
undergo medical examination in person by a Medical Board
constituted for the purpose by Directorate of Medical Education to
ascertain and confirm the nature and extent of Physical Disability.
“Presence of significant Locomotor Disability with or without any other
significant disability such as visual or hearing–speech or learning etc.
which will make it very difficult for the candidate to pursue and complete
the course satisfactorily and may significantly increase the risk to the
candidate or the patient(s) – may be declared NOT ELIGIBLE for
admission”.
2. The decision of the Commissioner, Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy
Department in this regard shall be final.
(d) SEATS EARMARKED IN BNYS COURSE FOR THE NOMINEE OF THE
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA / CANDIDATES FROM DEFICIENT STATES/
UNION TERRITORIES
NO. OF SEATS RESERVED: TWO
(One Seat in each of Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College,
Chennai and International Institute of Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
Sciences, Chengalpattu).
Candidates applying against this category of seat should apply online
through online portal [www.tnayushselection.org] compulsorily. Candidates
applying against this Category (IV) should send the downloaded application
form to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Government of Union
Territory or Deficient State and one self - attested copy of the application
should be submitted in advance within the stipulated last date to the
Secretary, Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy, Government of Tamil Nadu.
V
DETERMINATIONS OF RANK OF THE CANDIDATES:
1. Ranking will be made by merit on the basis of marks obtained by the eligible
candidates in the prescribed science subjects in the qualifying examinations
reduced to the base of 200 marks. The marks obtained through different
Boards of Examination will be taken into account after normalization of
marks.
20
CALCULATION
Weighted Total Marks for a maximum of : 200
Percentage in Physics and Chemistry-taken : (X)
together (after normalization)
Percentage in Biology/ Bio-technology (after : (Y)
normalization)
Percentage in Botany and Zoology-taken : (Z)
together (after normalization)
Weighted total marks for a maximum of 200 : Either (X+Y) OR
is (X+Z)
The percentage and weighted total should be accurate to two decimals.
2. Normalization of Marks:
i) The marks obtained by the students in the relevant subjects in the
qualifying examination conducted by various Boards or Authority will be
equated with the marks obtained by the students in the same subjects in the
qualifying examination conducted by the State Board of Tamil Nadu by
adopting the method of normalization.
Explanation: - Under the method of normalization, the highest mark obtained
by the students of various Boards in each subject will be equated to the
highest mark obtained by the students of State Board in that subject and the
relative marks obtained by other students in that subject will be determined
accordingly.
Illustration: - If the highest mark secured by the student of State Board in
Physics is 100, and the highest mark secured by the student of any other
Board in the same subject is 90, both the highest mark will be considered to
be equal to 100. If the student of the Other Board secures 60 marks in
Physics when the highest mark in Physics in the same board is 90, the 60
marks will be considered to be equal to 66.66 marks as arrived at below: -
100 x 60/90 = 66.66%
ii) After normalization of marks in the relevant subjects in the qualifying
examination conducted by different Boards, the qualified students of different
Boards will be merged into a common merit list.
3. Determination of Rank of Candidates Obtaining Equal Marks (Inter Se Merit):
21
In cases, where two or more candidates obtain equal aggregated marks for
200, the rank of such candidates shall be determined on the basis of the
following order:
(i) Percentage in Biology or Botany and Zoology or Bio-technology taken
together in qualifying examination.
(ii) Percentage in Chemistry in qualifying examination.
(iii) Percentage in fourth optional subject in qualifying examination.
(iv) Date of Birth- Weightage given to seniority in age
(v) Computerized Random number assigned. Higher value of Random
Number will be taken into Consideration.
4. The Provisional Rank list will be published by the Selection Committee on
the official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in & www.tnayushselection.org
VI.1 COUNSELLING:
i Selection of candidate will be done only through online Counselling based on
Provisional Rank List.
ii. a) Selection Committee is the Designated Authority that conducts online
counselling for admissions to BNYS course in all Government and Self-
Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges in Tamil Nadu.
b) No authority or institution shall admit any candidate to the undergraduate
course in contravention of the criteria or procedure as laid down by the
Selection Committee in respect of admissions and any candidate admitted in
contravention of the said criteria or procedure shall be discharged.
iii. All Communication regarding Counselling and any change or modification
and relevant information pertaining to admission process will be displayed in
the official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in & www.tnayushselection.org.
iv. The candidates are instructed to visit the website at least two times a day for
updates from the date of issue of application till the end of admission process
without fail. Selection Committee will not be responsible for consequences
resulting due to non-diligent follow-up of notices, notification and publications
appearing on the website regarding admission to B.N.Y.S. Course 2025-2026
Session.
22
v. Candidates should attend the counselling rounds as per the schedule
mentioned in official website: www.tnayushselection.org.
vi. The selection will be made by counselling based on the provisional Rank
List and applying rule of reservation as laid down by the Government of
Tamil Nadu. All candidates are eligible for selection under open competition
as per the provisional Rank List. In addition, the candidates belong to BC,
BC (M), MBC / DNC, SC, SCA, ST are eligible to the reservation made for
them as per their communities.
Open Competition 31.00%
Backward Classes 26.50%
Backward Classes (Muslim) 3.50%
Most Backward Classes and Denotified 20.00%
Communities
Scheduled Castes
Scheduled Castes (Arunthathiyar) (16% of 18.00%
seats out of 18% quota earmarked to SCs
shall be allocated to the Arunthathiyar
Community).
Scheduled Tribes 1.00%
vii. All selections and admissions to BNYS course are only provisional. The
selection and admission are liable to be cancelled at any time as and when
the eligibility conditions are found to be defective or incorrect or of any
suppression of facts deliberately or otherwise. The right of allotment to
BNYS Course, Category and College is vested totally with the selection
committee.
VI.2. ROUNDS OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
There are four Rounds of counselling
I. Round 1
II. Round 2
III. Round 3
IV. Stray Round
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR COUNSELLING:
At the time of registration of counselling, all the candidates must pay anon-
23
refundable online processing fee of Rs. 500/- for Government Quota Seats in
Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College / Institution and
Government Surrendered Seats in Self Financing Yoga and Naturopathy
Medical Colleges.
At the time of choice filling candidate should pay refundable advance
tuition fee of Rs. 5,000/- for both Government Seats in Government Colleges
and Government Surrendered Seats in Self Financing BNYS Medical
Colleges.
Note: This advance tuition fees amount will not be refunded after
allotment of seats in third round of counselling.
This Advance Tuition fee is exempted for the Candidates belongs to
“SC/SCA/ST/BC (Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Caste), if the
annual income is less than 2.5 Lakhs.”
V. The counselling Schedule will be uploaded in the official website from
time to time.
VI. Candidates are instructed to Register and Choice lock the seats for
each Round of counselling within the stipulated date and time as
mentioned in the counselling Schedule.
a. Candidates should be careful while choice filling and it is
advisable to choose preferred Colleges only.
b. Candidate could edit their Choice(s) but once the candidate
locks their choice(s) during the online counselling, it cannot be
changed later.
c. Admission to BNYS course shall be made by online counselling
on the basis of rank by applying the rule of reservation based on
the preference of Choices given by the candidate.
d. Candidates are advised not to share Login ID, Password and
OTP with others.
e. Mutual transfer / Individual request for transfer of College will
NOT be permitted under any circumstances.
f. All Candidates [Except those belongs to SC/SCA/ST/BC
(Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Caste), if the annual
income is less than 2.5 Lakhs] provisionally selected for
24
Government Surrendered Seats in Self Financing Yoga and
Naturopathy Medical Colleges can download the provisional
allotment order by paying the additional advance Tuition Fee of
Rs. 5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only). The balance Tuition
Fee should be paid to the College at the time of admission in
the College (Refer the fee details from Clause-VII.).
g. Any remaining unfilled seats of SCA Communities for want of
adequate number of eligible candidates after exhausting the
provisional Rank List shall be filled up on merit basis by
candidates belonging to SC Community and vice versa. (GO
(Ms) No.55, P & AR Department, Dated: 08.04.2010)
h. Any remaining unfilled seats of ST Communities for want of
adequate number of eligible candidates after exhausting the
provisional rank list shall be filled up on provisional rank list
basis by candidates belonging to SC Community. (GO (Ms)
No.77 Health & Family Welfare (MCA1) Department Dated
24.02.2011).
i. Any remaining unfilled seats of BC (M) communities for want of
adequate number of eligible candidates after exhausting the
merit list shall be filled up on provisional rank list basis by
candidates belonging to BC community. (G.O.Ms.No.30, H & FW
(MCA1) dept., Dated 18.01.2012)
ROUND 1 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
a. The candidates should pay a non-refundable amount of Rs. 500/-
(Rupees Five Hundred only) towards Registration Fee and
advance tuition fee of Rs. 5000/- (Rupees five thousand only) for
Government Seats in Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
Colleges and for Government Surrendered Seats in Self Financing
Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges during choice filling via
online Bank payment portal.
b. Candidates who are allotted a seat in Round 1 of the online
counselling should download their provisional allotment order and
join the course in the respective Colleges on or before the
25
stipulated date and time.
c. A candidate who has taken a seat and Not Joined/ Resigned the
course within the stipulated time will be eligible to attend the
subsequent Rounds of online counselling for the academic year
2025-2026.
d. Re-allotment is permitted during the Round 2 and Round 3 of
counselling based on rank.
ROUND 2 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
a. Candidates who had registered for Round-1 and did not get any seat
allotted are not required to register again. Also, candidates who have not
reported in Round-1 need not register again. Candidate who has joined
the seats and wish to opt for upgradation need not register again.
b. Candidate who wishes to retain their seats (who don’t want a change in
College) need not participate in Round 2.
c. Fresh choice filling is permitted in Round 2 only for candidates who did
not choice lock in Round 1.
d. If upgraded in Round 2, the candidate has to relinquish the seat from
Round 1 and join Round 2 allotted seat.
e. Round 2 choice filling will follow the registration and candidates who
wish for upgradation, un allotted candidates and not joined candidates
have to fill their choices.
f. If the candidate is reallotted in Round 2, then the BNYS seat allotted to
candidates during Round 1 of Counselling will be allotted to other
candidates in descending order, not in ascending order.
g. If the candidate has Not-Joined or discontinued the course before the
stipulated resignation date, the candidate will be eligible to attend the
subsequent rounds of online counselling (without forfeiture) for the
academic year 2025-2026.
h. If the candidate has joined but discontinued the course after the
stipulated date of resignation, he/she will be eligible to attend the
Round-3 of online counselling for the academic year 2025-2026, but
they will have to forfeit the registration fee, advance tuition fee, and
26
tuition fee paid by him/her and he/she should pay discontinuation fees
of Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh only).
i. Candidates getting upgraded in Round 2 shall NOT have any claim on
Round 1 seat.
Virtual vacancies:
 If a candidate allotted a seat in Round 1 opts for upgradation in Round
2, that Round 1 seat will be displayed as a virtual vacancy.
 All candidates will be allowed to fill choices for virtual vacancies during
Round 2 choice filling.
 However, such seats will be converted to real vacancies and allotted in
Round 2 only if the candidate from Round 1 vacates or upgrades the
seat.
ROUND - 3 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
After completion of Round 2 of Online counselling, the remaining
vacancies will be filled up with the candidates from the existing Provisional
Merit list by Round 3 Online counselling. When a candidate is scheduled to
attend the Round-3 online counselling, then the candidate has to pay the
Registration Fee of Rs.500/-(non-refundable) via online Bank payment portal.
The candidates who have already paid the registration during previous
Rounds of counselling need not pay again if they have not been allotted
seats.
ELIGIBLE CANDIDATES FOR ROUND-3:
a. Candidates who have registered for Round-1 or Round-2 and did not get
any seat allotted are not required to register again.
b. Fresh registration is permitted for Round-3 for candidates who have not
registered in Round-1 or Round-2 (with full payment of fees).
c. If upgraded in Round 1 to Round 2, the candidate must get relieved from
Round-1 or Round-2 seat and join Round-3 seat.
d. Once the candidate joins the Round 3 seat, candidates cannot upgrade
or resign from this seat. If wants to discontinue, then forfeit advance
tuition fees, tuition fee, and pay discontinuation fee.
27
e. If any candidate does not join the Round 3 allotted seat, candidate will
have to forfeit the Registration Fee, Advance Tuition Fee paid by
him/her. And they will also be not eligible to participate in the subsequent
Rounds of counselling.
Hence the candidates are advised to exercise due diligence in their options
and do not fill unwanted options in which they do not wish to pursue
studies.
STRAY ROUND OF COUNSELLING:
a. Stray vacancies if arises after the third round of Counselling, stray
vacancy counselling will be conducted by the Selection Committee as
per the directions of the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy.
b. The candidates should pay an advance Tuition Fee of Rs.50,000/
(Rupees Fifty Thousand only) for BNYS Course to participate in the stray
round or subsequent round if any via online bank payment portal which is
not refundable incase the candidate after allotment does not join the
course. This arrangement is done to avoid precious BNYS Course
remaining vacant at the end of multiple rounds of counselling.
c. Candidates who are not holding any seats in BNYS course will be eligible
to participate in this Counselling.
d. Candidates who have joined in the BNYS College will not be eligible to
participate in this counselling.
e. If the seat is allocated in the stray vacancy, the candidate has to
download the allotment order and join in the College within the stipulated
date and time as mentioned in the order. To download the allotment
order, the candidate should pay an additional Tuition Fee of Rs. 15, 000/-
(Rupees Fifteen Thousand only). In case, if the candidates fail to
download the allotment order or fails to join the College (after
downloaded the allotment order) within the stipulated date and time,
his/her advance tuition fee will be forfeited and he/she will not be able to
participate in Tamil Nadu BNYS Counselling for subsequent one
academic year. In case, if the candidate joined in the College and
28
discontinued the course, his/her advance tuition fee and tuition fee will be
forfeited, in addition he/she have to pay a discontinuation fee of RS.
1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Only), and he/she will not be able to
participate in Tamil Nadu BNYS Counselling for subsequent one
academic year.
f. Allotted candidates during Stray vacancy Round, if they fail to join,
they will have to forfeit the Advance tuition fee. They also will not be able
to participate in Tamil Nadu BNYS Counselling for subsequent one
academic year.
g. If it is found that a candidate is/was involved in impersonation /
suppression or misrepresentation of facts and production of falsified /
bogus certificates, his/her provisional allotment order will be cancelled
and legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated.
h. BNYS Seat matrix for Government Quota Seats in Government
Colleges and Government Surrendered Seats in Self Financing BNYS
Medical Colleges will be released in the website before counselling and
any addition of Colleges / Seats will be displayed at the time of
counselling.
Those who get Re-totaled / Revalued marks during the first appearance can
VI.3.
also attend the counselling on the day and session according to their new
marks. If the candidate produces the Re-totaled / Revalued marks after the
counselling and within the cutoff date then his/her name, will be considered
only in the existing vacancies available and he/she cannot claim any
preferential rights for allotment according to merit under re-totaled / revalued
marks. Candidates, who submit the Revalued / Re-totaled marks after the
administrative cut-off dates fixed by the Ministry of AYUSH, New Delhi / The
Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai, will not be considered
for selection.
Counselling / Allotment for the seats newly created due to provision of seat
VI.4.
matrix after the commencement of first Round of counselling by The Tamil
Nadu Dr. MGR Medical University or due to the orders / interim orders
passed / issued by the Honorable High Court after the commencement of 1st
Round of counselling will be done during the 2nd round of counselling but
within the cutoff date as laid down by the Affiliating Body, The Tamil Nadu
29
Dr. M.G.R. Medical University / Govt. of Tamil Nadu.
Note:
1. Candidates who fail to fill the choice in any round within the stipulated
time as mentioned in the Selection Committee official website, for
whatsoever reasons, will be given a chance to fill their choice and lock
them in the subsequent round of the existing available vacancies only
irrespective of their provisional rank.
2. Candidates getting allotment through Court Orders before the cutoff
date will be given a seat in the existing vacancies available at the time
of Round of counseling when he/she actually attends.
3. Those who do not join within the stipulated time to the particular
College to which they are allotted in any round, they will not be
considered for join at any point of time later under this quota of the
same round. However, they can appear for the subsequent round (if
applicable) as mentioned in the details of the rounds of counselling.
4. If a candidate fails to fill choice and lock them in any round, then
he/she will not be eligible for the same round seats at any point of
time later for whatsoever reason.
5. Individual request for transfer of College will not be entertained after
allotment of seat is made.
6. Mutual transfers will not be entertained under any circumstances.
VII FEE STRUCTURE FOR GOVERNMENT SURRENDERED SEATS:
a) Fee Structure for Self-Financing Colleges Rs.1,25,000/- (Per Annum)
inclusive of Tuition fee (Rs.80,000/-), Admission fee, Special fee, Laboratory /
Computer / Internet fee, Library fee, Sports fee, Maintenance and Amenities
fee, extracurricular activities fee and other recurring expenditure, as fixed by
the Committee on Fixation of fee in respect of Self-Financing Professional
Colleges from time to time.
b) Detailed information regarding Special Fees, Caution Deposit, Hostel Fees, if
availed, University Registration Fees, Examination Fees, etc. can be
obtained from the Head of the Institution in which the candidate joins.
c) The first graduate of a family selected to BNYS course for 2025-2026
session through Counselling will be exempted from paying only the Tuition
Fees in both Government and Self-Financing Colleges as per
30
G.O.No.85/Higher Education (J2) Dept. dt: 16.04.2010. Candidates should
furnish the self-attested Photostat copies of supportive documents
prescribed in this regard and also to fill up the ANNEXURE –VIII(a) and
ANNEXURE-VIII(b).
d) The students of SC/SCA/ST and Converted Christian (i.e., Christian Adi
Dravidar) Community whose parental annual income is less than
Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs Fifty Thousand only) are exempted from
payment of Only the advance Tuition Fees Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five
thousand Only) for Government Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
College/Institution and Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten thousand Only) for the Self-
Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges (As per G.O.Ms.No.06
Adi Dravidar and Tribal Welfare Department dated 09-01-2012). Candidates
should furnish supportive documents like Valid Income Certificate as per the
Annexure-X and Community Certificate obtained from the competent
authority along with the application.
VIII. NOTE
1. The Selected Candidates should produce all the original documents at the
time of admission to the Principal of the Medical College concerned.
Selection / Allotment will stand cancelled if the candidates do not produce
the original documents at the time of admission in the Institution.
2. Selected candidates should produce a physical fitness certificate obtained
from a Registered Medical Practitioner not below the rank of Assistant
Surgeon or “A” Class practitioner Registered with Tamil Nadu Board of
Indian Medicine or Tamil Nadu Siddha Medical Council or Tamil Nadu
Homoeopathy Medical Council, Chennai at the time of joining the course.
3. The candidate should ensure that all information including the marks in the
qualifying examination furnished by him/her in the online application and the
uploaded supportive documents are correct. The candidate is informed that
after scrutiny of his/her application, it is found that the marks furnished by
him/her in the application are not correct or any other information is found to
be incorrect, then;
a) He / She will forfeit the admission no matter at what stage of the
course he/she will be at that time.
b) He / She will be debarred from pursuing any studies for a period of
31
three years.
c) Legal action will be initiated against the candidate and the parents for
furnishing incorrect information.
d) Criminal action will be initiated against him/her for furnishing any false
documents.
4. Candidates selected for admission and his / her parent / guardian will have to
sign discipline declaration form in ANNEXURE - XII and failure to sign the
declaration will result in the cancellation of selection.
5. Candidates selected for admission to BNYS Course are not guaranteed any
appointment in Government Service.
6. Hepatitis-B vaccination:
All candidates selected for admission to first year BNYS course should take
the Hepatitis-B Vaccine before admission to the Course and only on
producing a certificate in ANNEXURE – IX, the Principals will admit the
candidates. The students should take further doses at the prescribed
intervals as required.
7. In respect of selected candidate’s adequate original documentary evidence
shall be required and verification may also be done to decide on their
eligibility under various categories.
8. Enquiry or any correspondence regarding the selection of candidates will not
be entertained.
9. The Candidates who join BNYS Course should not indulge or participate in
any kind of ragging. If they are found to have indulged in ragging in past or
noticed later, the candidates will be removed from roll of institution at
whatever stage of study and criminal action will be taken against candidates.
10. If proof of Authenticity of Certificates could not be obtained by the Institution
on time, the candidate will not be allowed to continue the 2nd year of study.
11. The Government Orders issued and to be issued from time to time
pertaining to any of the matters contained in the prospectus should be read
as part and parcel of this prospectus and such terms and conditions in the
Government Order are deemed to have been incorporated in this
prospectus.
12. No admission, re-allotment / transfer shall be made after cut-off date
32
/Extended Cut-off Date for the academic year as per the guidelines issued
by the Ministry of AYUSH, New Delhi / The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University.
13. COVID-19 PRECAUTIONS / INSTRUCTIONS
The candidates and their parents are instructed to follow the standard
preventive measures of COVID-19 during the special category offline
Counselling as per Government Orders from time to time.
IX. DISCONTINUATION FEES:
i) Candidates selected for admission and his/her parent /guardian will have to
execute an Agreement Bond as prescribed in ANNEXURE–XI. Failure to
execute the Agreement Bond will lead to cancellation of selection.
ii) Candidates who discontinue the course on or after the last cut off date for
admission process for the academic session 2025-2026 and on any date of
the subsequent year are bound by the bond and thereby, they shall have to
pay a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only) as penalty for having
breached the contract in the bond by means of Demand Draft drawn in
favour of “The Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai-106”
payable at Chennai.
Note:
This penalty is only for candidates who discontinue the course and not for
those Candidates who seek re-allotment from one to another College.
CHECK LIST FOR BNYS COURSE ADMISSION 2025-2026 SESSION
CASE- I : CANDIDATE’S WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU AND STUDIED
SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII- STD IN TAMIL NADU.
CASE- II : CANDIDATE’S WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU BUT STUDIED
SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII- STD PARTLY/ FULLY IN OUTSIDE TAMIL
NADU.
CASE- III : CANDIDATE’S WHO ARE NON- NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU
AND STUDIED SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII-STD CONTINUOUSLY IN
TAMIL NADU.
CERTIFICATES/ DOCUMENTS CASE-I CASE-II CASE-III
DOCUMENTS OF CANDIDATE’S ARE AS FOLLOWS:
33
X-Mark Sheet   
XI & XII –Mark Sheets   
Transfer Certificate   
Nativity Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil   
Nadu
Community Certificate from Competent Authority of   
Tamil Nadu (except- OC)
Certificate for Proof of Study from VI Std. to XII Std. in   
Tamil Nadu (From the Head of schools where studied)
Birth Certificate   
Eligibility Certificate obtained from the Tamil Nadu Dr.   
M.G.R. Medical University, Guindy, Chennai for the   
candidates of other Universities / Boards
(Except TN State Board, CBSC and ISCE Board)
Special Category Certificates for Persons with   
Benchmark Disabilities, Eminent Sports Person and Ex-   
Servicemen (if applicable)
Candidate’s Aadhar card   
DOCUMENTS OF PARENTS ARE AS FOLLOWS:
Parent Community Certificate from Competent 
 
Authority of Tamil Nadu (Except- OC)
Income Certificate of parent for the candidates claiming 
 
fee exemption
Round Free Exit Resignation Exit with Eligibility for Discontinuation Fees
Forfeiture of Further after Joining
Fees Counselling
Round Allowed Allowed Allowed to Eligible for NIL
1 exit further
counselling
Round Allowed Allowed only Allowed to Eligible for If the candidates resign
2 Once exit within further before the stipulated
within stipulated time counselling date in Round 2 the
stipulated without candidates will be
34
time forfeiture allowed free exit.
After the stipulated
date in round 2,
discontinuation fees
will be Rs.1 lakh and
forfeit Advance tuition
fees and tuition fees.
Round Not Not allowed If not joined, Not allowed in After joining the allotted
3 allowed forfeit Advance next round seat of round 3,
tuition fees and discontinuation fees
Tuition fee. will be Rs.1 lakh and
forfeiture of
Advance tuition fees
and tuition fees will
also apply.
Round Not Not allowed If not joined not eligible for After joining the allotted
4 (Stray allowed forfeit Advance next one year. seat of Stray round,
round) tuition fees & discontinuation fees
Tuition fee and will be Rs.1 lakh and
not eligible for forfeiture of Advance
next one year. tuition fees and tuition
fees will also apply.
ROUND CANDIDATE FORFEITURE OF FEES ELIGIBILITY
Round 1 If allotted No forfeiture of fees Can participate in round 2 for
and joined re- allotment
If allotted and No forfeiture of fees Can participate in subsequent
not rounds of counseling
joined/Resigned
If not Can participate in subsequent
allotted/not rounds of counseling
choice locked
Round 2 No forfeiture of fees. Allowed to Allowed for further rounds of
If allotted
vacate seat once before the counseling
and joined
stipulated date.
35
If allotted / No forfeiture of fees Allowed for further rounds of
Re-allotted and counseling
not joined
If not choice
No forfeiture of fees Eligible for round 3
locked
If wants to Forfeiture of advance tuition fee Not eligible for round 3
discontinue and tuition fee, in addition he/she
after the should pay discontinuation fee.
stipulated date
and time
If not allotted Eligible for round 3
Round 3 If allotted Not allowed to vacate seat. Not allowed for further rounds of
and joined If wants to discontinue, then Forfeit counseling
advance tuition fee and tuition fee,
in addition he/she should pay
discontinuation fee.
If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for stray round
Not joined
If not allotted Eligible for stray vacancy
If not choice
Eligible for stray vacancy
locked
Stray Not allowed to vacate seat.
vacanc If wants to discontinue, then forfeit
If allotted
y advance tuition fee and tuition fee,
and joined
in addition he/she should pay Not eligible for next one year.
discontinuation fee.
If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for next one year.
Not joined
ANNEXURE – I
SPECIAL CATEGORIES WITH THEIR CODE NUMBERS
(With respect to Government Colleges only)
No. of Seats Reserved
Government Yoga International Institute of
Code
Special Category and Naturopathy Yoga and Naturopathy Total
No.
Medical College, Medical Sciences,
Chennai Chengalpattu.
01 Children of Ex- 1 1 2
36
Servicemen
02 Eminent Sportsperson 1 1 2
03 Differently Abled 3 5 8
Candidate from
04 Deficient State / Union 1 1 2
Territories
Total 6 8 14
ANNEXURE - II
LIST OF GOVERNMENT YOGA AND NATUROPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGE /
INSTITUTION
Sl. Name of the Annual
No Name of the Institution Course intake
GOVERNMENT YOGA & NATUROPATHY
1 MEDICAL COLLEGE, ARUMBAKKAM, BNYS 60
CHENNAI – 600 106.
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOGA AND
2 BNYS 100
NATUROPATHY MEDICAL SCIENCES,
CHENGALPATTU-603 001.
Note: Seat allotment will be made to the above Colleges subject to Approval, Affiliation and
Provision of Seat Matrices by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University.
ANNEXURE III
LIST OF SELF-FINANCING YOGA AND NATUROPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGES
(Provided the Colleges voluntarily surrender their seats for allotment of
candidates under single window system by the Government through
Counselling)
Sl. Annual
Government
No Name of the Institution intake
Quota seats
1 J.S.S. INSTITUTE OF NATUROPATHY AND
100
65
YOGIC SCIENCES,
37
PALAKKAD MAIN ROAD,
COIMBATORE- 641 105.
PHONES: 9047596555,9486622485, 0422-
2656470
Email: jssinyscoimbatore@gmail.com
2 SIVARAJ NATUROPATHY & YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE, SIDDHAR KOILROAD,
THUMBATHULIPATTY, PERUMAMPATTY POST,
40 26
SALEM - 636 307.
PHONE: 7448883500, 0427-2481006, 2481007
Email: sivarajcolleges@yahoo.com
3 SREE RAMAKRISHNA MEDICAL COLLEGE OF
NATUROPATHY AND YOGIC SCIENCES,
KULASEKARAM, KANNIYAKUMARI - 629 161, 100 65
PHONE:04651-278425,277065,
Email: srkmcollege@gmail.com.
4 EXCEL MEDICAL COLLEGE FOR
NATUROPATHY AND YOGA,
PALLAKAPALAYAM,
NAMMAKAL DISTRICT- 637 303. 100 65
PHONE: 9842713789, 04288-227361 TO 68
Email: principalbnys@excelcolleges.com
5 NANDHA NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
TIRUVACHI VILLAGE, ERODE – 638 052, 60 39
PHONE: 04294-224611, 221405,
Email: nny@nandhainstitutions.org
6 ANNAI COLLEGE OF NATUROPATHY AND
YOGA SCIENCE,
KOVILACHERI, KUMBAKONAM, 100 50
TANJAVUR – 612 503.
PHONE: 9600087363, 9360395392,
38
9843228957.
Email : admission@annaicollege.com,
admissionbnys@gmail.com.
7 KRISHNA NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
KOTTAIMEDU, IRUNGALUR, TRICHY – 621
100
65
105.
PHONE:8300373889, 0431-2616789.
Email : knaymc@gmail.com
8 MOTHER TERASA NATUROPATHY AND
YOGA MEDICAL COLLEGE,
METTUSALAI, ILLUPPUR,
PUDUKKOTTAI - 622 102. 100 65
PHONE:04339-272151,
9443372151.
Email : mtbnys2018@gmail.com
9 S THANGAPAZHAM MEDICAL COLLEGE OF
NATUROPATHY AND YOGIC SCIENCE RESEARCH
CENTRE,
VASUDEVANALLUR, ATHUVAZHI, TENKASI - 627
100 65
760.
PHONE : 8220912307, 9489805644, 04636-242460
Email : stmcnys@gmail.com
10 KONGU NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
THOPPUPALAYAM, PERUNDURAI - 638 060.
100 65
PHONE : 9952851503, 9489481489, 9944567375,
04294-226750, 226744
Email : kongunymc@kongu.edu
11 SIR ISSAC NEWTON NATUROPATHY AND YOGA
MEDICAL COLLEGE,
100 65
PAPPAKOVIL, NAGAPATTINAM-611 102.
CELL : 7373765117, 9384314365, 9842450111,
39
9751330555.
Email : principalsininys@gmail.com
12 ATTHI NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
KAKATHOPPU, GUDIYATTAM, VELLORE DIST-635
100 65
806.
PHONE : 04171-228108, 8754959066.
Email : atthinaturopathymedicalcollege@gmail.com
13 SHRI INDRA GANESAN INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL
SCIENCE NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
MANIKANDAM, TRICHY-620 012. 100 65
PHONE: 8508688841, 7373333444.
Email : indraganesantrust@gmail.com,
director@indraganesaninstitutions.com
14 SONA MEDICAL COLLEGE OF NATUROPATHY AND
YOGA,
KANDARKULAMANICKAM, SALEM-637 504 100 65
CELL : 94427 00351, 94427 00353, 94427 00366.
Email : principal@sonamedicalcollege.ac.in
15 G.T.N. MEDICAL COLLEGE OF NATUROPATHY AND
YOGA,
GTN NAGAR, DINDIGUL-624 005 100 65
CELL : 7397793313, 9791877074, 9677973774
Email : gtnnaturopathy2021@gmail.com
16 SWAMY VIVEKANANDHA NATUROPATHY AND
YOGA MEDICAL COLLEGE,
VEERACHIPALAYAM, SANKARI TK,
SALEM DIST-637 303
100 65
PHONE : 04288-234670 (4 LINES), 9047705939,
9788854417.
Email : swamyvivekanandhabnys@gmail.com,
vivekaadmission@gmail.com.
17 IMMANUEL ARASAR YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
MEDICAL COLLEGE, NATTALAM, MARTHANDAM 100 65
KANYAKUMARI
40
PHONE: 9443606955
NOTE:
Seat allotment will be made to the above colleges subject to Approval, Affiliation and
Provision of Seat Matrices by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University. Refer the
categories of seats under Clause. No.IV.1b. in the prospectus.
ANNEXURE - IV
CERTIFICATE OF NATIVITY IN TAMIL NADU
Certified that Thiru / Selvi / Tmt.
....................................................................................................... S/o. / D/o. / W/o. of
........................................................... residing at .........................................
.................................................................................................................................................
............ an applicant for seeking admission to BNYS course in Government / Self-financing
Colleges in Tamil Nadu is a Native of Tamil Nadu.
41
Signature:
Name &
Designation:
Station:
Office Seal:
Date:
NOTE:
(1) This Certificate should be issued by an officer of the Revenue Department not below
the rank of Tahsildar in the Taluk concerned.
(2) This Certificate should not be issued by the Special Tahsildars.
(3) Any foreign national irrespective of the period of study in the State will not become
eligible to apply for this course. No certificate of Nativity in the State of Tamil Nadu,
should therefore be issued to Nationals of other countries for this purpose.
(4) The Certificate should bear the stamp of the office of the Officer signing the
Certificate. The certifying officers should insist upon clear proof of the Nativity of the
Parent or Guardian of the candidate and satisfy themselves on the genuineness of
the residential qualification. They should be particularly careful in the case of
candidates whose mother tongue is not Tamil and whose place of birth is other than
Tamil Nadu and who have studied VI th to XII STD. outside Tamil Nadu.
(5) Residence Certificate will not be considered as Nativity Certificate.
(6) The guidelines prescribed for the issue of Nativity Certificate and they are as follow
as per Lr. No. R.A.V(B) –16932/2000, dated 3.4.2000 of the Special Commissioner
and Commissioner of Revenue Administration, Chepauk, Chennai 5.
i. The parents/ guardians of the applicants/ students or the applicant themselves
should have permanently resided continuously for a period of 5 years in Tamil
Nadu.
ii. Permanently residing for a period of 5 years should be supported by
documentary evidence.
iii. The family ration card, Electoral Roll, census list if taken recently, documents
like sale deed, tax receipt etc. relating to the property owned by either of the
parents or by the applicant may be verified.
iv. The Transfer Certificate issued by the school authorities where the applicant
had studied last may be verified to know whether he/she was in the State for 5
years.
42
v. Enquiry in the village/ place of residence of the neighbor by Village
Administrative Officers regarding continuous residing.
vi. To ensure that wrong or incorrect address had not been furnished to obtain the
certificate.
vii. The birth place of the parent, place of the residence of the parent/ father,
permanent assets, mother tongue, place of education, place of marriage of the
applicant/parents, the period of stay in and outside Tamil Nadu can also be
considered before issuing certificate.
ANNEXURE-V
Certificate of Department of Ex-Servicemen’s Welfare
(Website:www.esmwel.tn.gov.in)
Pensioner / Non-Pensioner / Family Pensioner Identity Card no. < I Card No>
Mobile No: <mobile No> E-mail ID - <email id>
Name of the Applicant: <Name of the Application No. ……………….
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
43
--------
OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY / ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EX-SERVICEMEN’S WELFARE,
<DIST> CERTIFICATE OF DEPENDENCY ON EX-SERVICEMEN
Academic Year 2025 -2026
No. <dist code / Year / Stream / Sl.no> Dated: <date>
This is to certify that Selvan/Selvi/Thiru/ Tmt <Name of the applicant> is
the <relationship> of and is solely dependent on the Ex-Servicemen whose
particulars are furnished below.
He/She is eligible for consideration for admission to professional /
Academic / Technical / Law / Others (specify) courses in <Stream> against the
reservation of seats for:
(i) Children of Ex-Servicemen
(ii) Children of Ex-Servicemen died / disabled in war / peace time
(iii) Wife / Widow of Ex-Servicemen (Tick the relevant box)
Signature :
Signature of the Candidate: Designation:
SERVICE PARTICULARS OF EX-SERVICEMAN
Regimental No. : <Service No>
Name : <name>
Rank : <rank>
Regiment / Corps : <Regiment / Crops>
44
Date of enrolment : <DOE>
Date of discharge / death : <DOD>
Cause of discharge : <cause of Discharge>
Whether died / disabled in war / peace :
Operation in which Martyred / Disable :
(If applicable)
Character assessed at the time of discharge <Character>
:
Office Seal:
Station: <Office of DD / AD ESM Welfare, Signature:
<Dist> Date: Designation:
Note: This Certificate shall be issued by an Officer of the Department of Ex-Servicemen’s
Welfare of Tamil Nadu not below the rank of Assistant Director of Ex-Servicemen’s
Welfare Board of the District in which the dependent is a NATIVE. This reservation is
applicable only to Tamil Nadu Native Candidates.
ANNEXURE VI
SELECTION OF CANDIDATES UNDER QUOTA FOR EMINENT SPORTS
PERSONS FOR 2025-2026 SESSION
1. The purpose of this quota is to recognize and give weightage to the sports eminence
of the candidates and hence marks for sports achievements alone will be considered
in ranking the candidates. The candidates are expected to continue their good
performance in sports, even after admission.
45
2. The candidate shall submit all the sports certificates along with participation
certificates and relevant forms, issued by Association / Recognized Federation, but
only one highest achievement in a tournament (among the International, National,
State, Regional and District) in an academic year in the sports disciplines listed in
3. TSaeblelect iVoInI woifl l tbhee ccoannsdidideareted wfoirll abwea rbdainsge dm oanrk sth. e marks obtained by the candidate
strictly following the guidelines, given in the tables.
Table (I) - Marks for Recognized International Achievement
Sl. Competition Gold Silver Bronze Participation
No.
1. International (Representing India 1000 850 650 400
Category–IA, IB) – Once in 4 years
2. International (Representing India 500 450 400 250
Category–II) – Once in 2 years
3. International (Representing India 400 350 300 200
Category–III) – Every year
Table (II) - Marks for Recognized National Achievement
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No.
Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. National Championships /
National games – Organized by
190 160 130 100
46
National Federations / IOA
2. School Games Federation of India
190 160 130 100
(SGFI) National Level Competition
3. Khelo India Youth Games -
190 160 130 100
National Level
Table (III) - Marks for Recognized State Championship and State Competition
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No.
Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. State Championship
Representing Revenue District –
95 80 65 45
Organized by State Associations
2. Bharathiar Day Sports Meet
95 80 65 45
(State Level)
3. Republic Day Sports Meet (State
95 80 65 45
Level)
4. KVS / CBSE / CISCE (ISCE)
95 80 65 45
Board National Sports Meet
5. SDAT State Level Chief
Minister’s Trophy for Sports 95 80 65 45
and Games
Table (IV) – Marks for Recognized Regional Level Achievements
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No.
Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. KVS / CBSE / CISCE (ISCE) 60 45 30 10
Board National Sports Meet
47
(Regional Level)
Table (V) – Marks for recognized District Level Achievements
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No.
Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. District Tournaments / Sports Meet 45 30 15 5
/ Championships conducted by
District Sports Associations
(recognized by SDAT/TNOA)
2. District / Education District Inter 45 30 15 5
School Competition (District Level)
3. SDAT - District Level Chief 45 30 15 5
Minister’s Trophy for Sports and
Games
4. (a) GUIDELINES FOR INTERNATIONAL TOURNAMENTS:
CATEGORY – I:
 (I - A) Olympic Games (Summer / Winter), Youth Olympic Games (Summer
/ Winter), Commonwealth Games and Asian Games (Games organized in 4
years frequency by the International Olympic Committee).
 (I - B) World Championship, Commonwealth championship, World Cup-
(organized in 4 Years frequency by the International Sports Federations).
 Eligibility for athletes requires participation in an event involving at least
seven different countries and such competitions should have been
approved by Indian Olympics Association (IOA), Sports Authority of India
(SAI) and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS).
CATEGORY – II:
 World Championship, World cup, Asian Championship, SAF Games
(South Asian Games), Commonwealth championship Organized in 2 years
frequency by the International Sports Federation.
 Eligibility for athletes requires participation in an event involving at least
48
seven different countries and such competitions should have been
approved by Indian Olympics Association (IOA), Sports Authority of India
(SAI) and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS).
 Open or Invitational or Memorial or any indifferent nomenclature or title of
tournaments or Championships at International level, not approved by any
of the above authority will not be considered for marks.
CATEGORY – III:
 Asian Championships, Commonwealth Games, World cup, World
Championship, Grand Prix, Grand slam - Organized in Every year by the
International Sports Federation.
 Eligibility for athletes requires participation in an event involving at least
seven different countries and such competitions should have been
approved by Indian Olympics Association (IOA), Sports Authority of India
(SAI) and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS) Government of
India.
1. Participation or achievement in International tournaments will be
considered only with earlier achievements at National and State level
tournaments. Direct participation / Selection trials / Camps any
International or National tournaments will not be considered for award of
marks.
2. The highest achievement in only one annual regular tournament, officially
conducted in a regular manner by the member National Olympic
Committee (NOCs) authorized by the International Olympic Committee
(IOC) or International Sports Federations affiliated to the IOC will be
considered for award of marks. The players /s ports persons representing
the Country in such tournaments through Indian Olympic Association (IA)
or respective National Sports Federations recognized by the Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India or IOA will be considered
for award of marks in each year.
3. Only tournaments officially recognized by the Indian Olympic Association /
respective official National Sports Federations Recognized by MAYS will
be considered for the award of marks (for each year) from 01.06.2021 to
31.05.2022, 01.06.2022 to 31.05.20223, 01.06.2023 to 31.05.2024 and
01.06.2024 to 31.05.2025.
49
4. Certificates of Participation or Achievements in tournaments, submitted
along with Form I alone are eligible for marks indicated in Table (I) above
(should be submitted before the last date for submission of application).
5. Players who participated in any of the categories I, II and III, in Table(I)
should produce the copies of the following: -
i. VISA, Immigration entry in passport, clearance from Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports (Government of India), Indian Olympic Association
and respective National Sports Federations including BCCI.
ii. The fixture, draw, schedule of events, players' accreditation, National
Medal, Merit, Diploma, Participation certificate and Form-I issued by
the respective National Sports Federation and certificates signed and
issued in the prescribed format by the President or Secretary General
of the National Olympic Committee of the Organizing Country and
International Sports Federation.
4. (b) FOR NATIONAL TOURNAMENTS:
1. National tournaments should have been officially be recognized as the
regular annual championship / tournament by MYAS or IOA or SAI or
SDAT or SGFI Nationals conducted every year by school education
department in age groups (U-14, U-17, U-19) or respective official National
Sports Federation will be considered (for each year) for the award of
marks.
2. Marks will not be awarded for selection trials and coaching camps.
3. Tournaments conducted by the Federations which are not recognized by
the IOA or MYAS, TNOA or SDAT at National level for a particular period
will not be considered for award of marks.
4. Candidates must have participated at Zonal Cluster, District, Regional,
State, National and International in a particular Game/Sport in the same
hierarchical order as per the existing norms applicable for a particular
Game/Sports.
4. (c) FOR STATE TOURNAMENTS:
1. State level tournaments should officially be recognized as the regular annual
championship or tournament by respective official State Association or SAI
or SDAT or School Education Department of Tamil Nadu will be considered
50
(for each year) for the award of marks.
2. Marks will not be awarded for selection trials and coaching camps.
3. Any tournaments conducted by the Association which are de-recognized by
the SDAT at State level for a particular period will not be considered for
award of marks. (Refer Recognized Association list attached in ANNEXURE
VI).
4. (d) FOR TAMIL NADU BOARD CBSE/KV SCHOOLS / CISCE - SPORTS
ACHIEVEMENTS:
1. Tamil Nadu Board schools, KV / CISCE and CBSE Schools, School Zonal
and School cluster level achievements will not be considered.
2. The candidates participated in the tournament conducted by CBSE and KV
Schools, at Regional / South Zone are equated to Regional Level
Achievements and the National Level Achievements are equated to State
level of State / Matric Board Schools.
5. GENERAL CONDITIONS:
1. For consideration of candidates seeking admission under the category of
eminent sports person, he/she should enclose all the attested photo copies
of participation certificates and the relevant forms issued by the competent
sports authorities. The application along with all the sports certificates
/relevant forms/documents as given in 4(a) 5, should be presented for
certificate verification which will be done at Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Arumbakkam,
Chennai- 600 106.
2. Participation / achievements in each academic year from 01.06.2021 to
31.05.2022, 01.06.2022 to 31.05.2023, 01.06.2023 to 31.05.2024 and
01.06.2024 to 31.05.2025 in sports / games shown in the list alone will be
considered for the award of marks. National or State Level Championships
or Tournaments conducted by Sports Federations or Associations
recognized by MYAS or IOA or SDAT or TNOA alone will be considered
for the award of marks. (Recognition of State Associations / National
Federations should be relevant to the year concerned).
3. Relevant attested copies of certificates issued by the competent authorities
as detailed below are to be submitted along with the application before the
last date for receiving the applications.
51
4. Open or Invitational or Memorial or any indifferent nomenclature or title of
tournaments or Championships at District or State or National or
International level will not be considered for marks.
5. District or Inter-District Championship means the championships
conducted by the respective recognized District or State Sports
Association for the State of Tamil Nadu.
6. Direct participation or achievement at any level without participating in the
qualifying level competitions such as District or State or National or direct
selection conducted by District or State Sports Association or National
Sports Federation to represent the District or State or National or
International tournaments or championships will not be considered for
award of marks.
7. For International achievements in Tennis, marks for Gold, Silver and
Bronze will be awarded to players who are ranked first, second and third
respectively in the ATP or WTA rankings of International Tennis Federation
for awarding participation marks for the top 5 ranked players will be
considered from the ATP or WTA list published by the International Tennis
Federation. Necessary document and proof should be enclosed by the
candidate for National or State level achievement in Tennis, marks for
Gold, Silver and Bronze will be awarded to players who are ranked first,
second and third respectively in the AITA or TNTA at National or State for
awarding participation mark the top 5 ranked players will be considered
from the list published by AITA or TNTA at National or State level based on
the ranking. Necessary documents and proof should be enclosed by the
candidate.
8. Certificates should be in printed form and necessary Form-I and II should
be in prescribed format. (Certificates or forms issued in letter pads will be
invalid).
9. All other sport disciplines in which ranking is the criteria for assessment of
achievement, rules indicated in item 8 above will be applicable for the
award of marks.
10. For Cricket, the annual official Championships or tournaments
conducted within the country under the auspices of TNCA or BCCI at
52
District or State or National Level alone will be taken into consideration for
that year.
11. Multiple events in a particular sport must be standardized events and in
accordance with the events organized by the approved International
Federations. Events newly created and not in accordance with the
requirement will not be considered for award of marks.
12. Participation or achievements of candidates with nativity of Tamil Nadu
who represented Tamil Nadu alone are eligible for marks under National
Category.
13. Only Tamil Nadu candidates are eligible to apply for admission under
Sports Quota and only the KVS and CBSE schools within Tamil Nadu are
eligible for marks.
14. A Common Committee for Engineering and Medicine constituted for this
purpose will rank the candidates based on the marks assigned to the
certificates enclosed along with the application. Candidates with a
minimum sports mark of 5 and above alone will be considered for ranking.
15. All the achievement certificates are to be supported necessarily by the
relevant participation certificates and appropriate forms.
16. No further enclosures or certificates will be entertained after the last
date for submission of completed application in person.
17. Highest achievement or participation certificates obtained by candidates
at different levels such as District or State or National or International in
each year along with earlier achievements should be enclosed without fail.
(A candidate shall enclose a copy of all eligible certificates for scrutiny).
18. Candidates in proportion to the available seats will be called to appear
before the Common Committee for Engineering or Medicine for verification
of the Originals, followed by counseling after ranking.
19. If any candidate fails to produce the requisite Original Certificates or
Forms, his/her place will be allotted to the candidate next in rank and so
on. The consequential vacancy at the end of the rank list will be filled up
from among the additional candidates according to their ranks.
20. All the highest level of participation or achievement should be
supported by earlier achievements at all levels of competition.
53
21. Short listed candidates will be called for counselling based on their rank
and branches and Colleges will be allotted according to their choices from
the number of seats reserved under sports quota based. Sports quota
counselling will be held before the commencement of general counselling.
22. Candidates securing admissions under Eminent Sports Persons quota
should sign an undertaking at the time of receiving allotment order
assuring participation in sports activities in the College preferred by them.
23. Legal action would be taken on parents and candidates for furnishing
bogus documents. They should ensure that the certificates obtained are
from competent authorities.
24. A candidate can utilize the Sports Quota only once for Engineering or
Medicine.
25. List of Games and sports decided by the Concern University.
TABLE (VI) - Competent authority to issue Forms / Certificates
Category Competent Authority Form /
Certificate
International President / Secretary of the National
(Representing Nation) Sports Federation (recognized by Ministry
of Youth Affairs and Sports / IOA) Certificate and
Participation certificate / Diploma should Form – I
be signed by the President / Secretary
General / Chairman of the organizing
Committee of the host Nation.
National Championship Member Secretary, SDAT or Secretary of the Certificate and
(Representing Tamil Nadu State Association (recognized both by SDAT Form – II
State) and TNOA)
National Games President or Secretary of IOA and Chairman Certificate and
(Representing Tamil Nadu of the organizing committee Form – II
State)
National Chief Inspector of Physical Education for Certificate and
(Representing State) National School Games competitions Form – IV
School Games President / Hon. Gen. Secretary, SGFI Certificates
54
Federation of India and Forms
(SGFI) (National Level)
KVS Nationals (State Level) Commissioner or Joint Commissioner or Certificates
KVS
CISCE (ISCE) Nationals Deputy Secretary or Chairman of Counsel Certificates
for Indian School Certificate Examination
(CISCE)
CM Trophy Member Secretary, Sports Development Certificates
(State Level) Authority of Tamil Nadu
SDAT approved State level Member Secretary, Sports Development Certificates
tournaments Authority of Tamil Nadu
CBSE National Sports Meet A. E. O. – Sports / Secretary, CBSE Certificates
(State Level)
Bharathiar Day Sports Meet District Inspector of Physical Education and Certificates
(State Level) Chief Inspector of Physical Education
Republic Day Sports Meet District Inspector of Physical Education and Certificates
(State Level) Chief Inspector of Physical Education
KVS Regional Level Assistant Commissioner of KVS Certificates
(Divisional Level)
CBSE South Zone Sports A.E.O. – Sports / Secretary, CBSE Certificates
Meet (Divisional Level)
District Inter School District Inspector of Physical Education – Certificates
Competitions (District Level) DIPE and District Education Officer
Table-VII: Sports Quota–2025–List of Sports Disciplines
1. Athletics 29. Powerlifting
2. Atya Patya 30. Roller Skating
3. Badminton 31. Rowing
4. Ball Badminton 32. Rugby
5. Baseball 33. Sailing
6. Basketball 34. Sepak Takraw
7. Beach Volley ball 35. Shooting
8. Billiards and Snookers 36. Silambam
9. Body Building 37. Soft Ball
10. Boxing 38. Squash Rackets
55
11. Carrom 39. Swimming
12. Chess 40. Table Tennis
13. Cricket 41. Taek–won–do
14. Cycling 42. Tennikoit
15. Fencing 43. Tennis
16. Football 44. Throwball
17. Golf 45. Triathlon
18. Gymnastics 46. Volleyball
19. Handball 47. Weightlifting
20. Hockey 48. Wrestling
21. Judo 49. Wushu
22. Kabaddi 50. Yachting
23. Karate–Do 51. Yogasanas
24. Kho – Kho 52. Cycle Polo
25. Korf Ball 53. Archery
26. Mallakhamb 54. Soft Tennis
27. Motor Sports 55. Canoeing & Kayaking
28. Netball 56. Roll Ball
56
ANNEXURE – VI (A)
DECLARATION OF THE CANDIDATE FOR SPORTS QUOTA
Name of the candidate:
Registration Number :
(Plus Two / Equivalent Examination)
Details of sports certificates enclosed*
57
raeY
cimedacA
/
lanoitanretnI
/
etatS
/ lanoitaN
/
lanoisiviD tcirtsiD
eht
fo
emaN
teem
stropS
enilpicsid
stropS
enuJ(
raeY
&
htnoM
5202
yaM
ot
1202
VI/II/
smroF
tnaveleR
)oN/seY(
desolcne
Eligible Marks
Total
Marks
dloG
)I(
revliS
)II(
eznorB
)III(
noitapicitraP
2024-2025
(XII Std.)
2023-2024
(XI Std.)
2022-2023
(X Std.)
2021-2022
(IX Std.)
Total No. of Grand
Certificates Total
enclosed
* Highest achievement/participation certificates obtained by candidate at different levels
such as district/State/National/International in each year along with earlier achievements
should be enclosed without fail. Nothing prevents a candidate enclosing all eligible
certificates for scrutiny but may be arranged as per the serial number starting from June
2021 and submitted along with the application.
DECLARATION
The information furnished above and all the enclosures submitted by me are true. Should it
however be found that any information furnished therein is untrue with respect to sports
details, I realize that I am liable for criminal prosecution and I also agree to the forfeiture of
my seat under sports quota.
Signature of the Parent Signature of the
Candidate
Date: Date:
58
ANNEXURE – VII
CERTIFICATE OF DISABILITY
(As per GoI Gazette Notification No.93, dated: 16.02.2022)
Certificate No………………….. Date………………
Name of the Designated Disability Centre
(as per annexure):
This is to certify that Dr. / Mr. / Ms. /
……………………….………………………. aged ………………….
Years, Son / Daughter of Thiru……………………………………….
residing at
…………………………………………………………………………………
……
…………………………………………………………………………………………………..
Disability (Name of the Specified Disability)
…………………………………………………………. (in percentage) of
….…………………… (in words) ………………………..( in figure) .
 Please tick on the “Specified Disability”
(Assessment may be done on the basis of Gazette of India. Extraordinary, Part-III,
Section 4) similar to MCI notification.
Sl. Disability Type of Specified Disability Range
No. Category Disabilities Disability (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) Eligible for Eligible for Not
B.N.Y.S. B.N.Y.S. Eligible for
Programme, Programme, Programm
Not Eligible for Eligible for e
PwD Quota PwD Quota
1. Physical (A) (a) Leprosy Less than 40-80% More than
59
Disability Locomotor cured person* 40% disability disability 80%
Disability, (b) Cerebral Persons
including Palsy** with
Specified (c) Dwarfism more than
Disabilities (a (d) Muscular 80% disability
to f). Dystrophy may also be
(e) Acid attack allowed on
victims case to case
(f) Other* basis and
** such as their function
Amputation, a
Poliomyelitis, incompetency
etc. will the aid of
assistive
devices, if it is
being used, to
see if its is
brought
below 80%
and whether
they possess
sufficient
motor ability
as required to
pursue and
complete
the
programme
satisfactorily.
* Attention should be paid to loss of sensations in fingers
and hands, amputation, as well as involvement of eyes and
corresponding recommendations be looked at.
** Attention should be paid to impairment of vision, hearing,
cognitive function
etc. and corresponding recommendations be looked at.
*** Both hands intact, with intact sensations, sufficient
strength and range of
motion are essential to be considered eligible for
B.N.Y.S. programme.
(a) Blindness Less than Equal to
or More
40% disability
60
(b) Low vision (i.e. than 40%
Disabilit
Category 0
y (i.e.
(10%),I (20%)
Category
& II (30%) III and
above)
(C) Hearing (a) Deaf Less than Equal to
Impairment (b) Hard of 40% Disability or more
@ hearing than 40%
Disability
(*) Persons with Visual impairment/ visual disability of more
than 40% may be made eligible to pursue Graduate
B.N.Y.S. Education and may be given reservation, subject
to the condition that the visual disability is brought to a level
of less than the benchmark of 40% with advanced low
vision aids such as telescopes / magnifier etc.
@ Persons with hearing disability of more than 40% may e
made eligible to pursue Graduate B.N.Y.S. Education and
may be given reservation, subject to the condition that the
hearing disability is brought to a level of less than the
benchmark of 40% with the aid of assistive devices.
In addition to this, the individual should have a speech
discrimination score of more than 60%.
(D) Speech & Organic/ Less than Equal to or
language neurological 40% more than
disability causes Disability 40%
Disability
It is proposed that for admission to B.N.Y.S. programme the Speech
Intelligibility Affected (SIA) score shall not exceed 3 (Which will correspond
to less than 40%) to be eligible to pursue the B.N.Y.S. programme. The
individuals beyond this score will not be eligible for admission to the
B.N.Y.S. programme.
Persons with an Aphasia Quotient (AQ) up to 40% may be eligible to
pursue B.N.Y.S. programme but beyond that they will neither be eligible to
pursue the B.N.Y.S. programme nor will they have any reservation.
2. Intellectua (a) Specific # currently there is no Quantification scale
l disability learning available to assess the severity of SpLD,
disabilities therefore the cut-off of 40% is arbitrary and
(Perceptual more evidence is needed.
disabilities, Less than Equal to or
61
Dyslexia, 40% more than 40%
Dyscalculia, Disability disability But
Dyspraxia & selection will
Developmenta be based on
l aphasia)# the learning
competency
evaluated with
the help of the
remediation /
assisted
technology /
aids /
infrastructural
changes by the
Expert Panel.
(b) Autism Absence or Currently not Equal to
spectrum Mild recommended or more
disorders Disability, due to lack of than60%
Asperser objective disability
syndrome method to or
(disability of establish presence
40-60% as presence and of
per ISAA) extent of cognitive
where the mental illness. /intellectua
individual is However, the l disability
deemed fit for benefit of and or if
B.N.Y.S. reservation/qu the person
programme ota may be is deemed
by an expert considered in unfit for
panel future after pursuing
developing B.N.Y.S.
better programme
methods of by an
disability expert
assessment. panel.
3. Mental Mental illness Absence or Currently not Equal to
Behaviour mild recommended or more
Disability: less due to lack of than 40%
than 40% objective disability
(under method to or if the
IDEAS) establish person is
62
presence and deemed
extent of unfit to
mental illness. perform
However, the hi/her
benefit of duties.
reservation/qu Standards
ota may be may be
considered in drafted for
future after the
developing definite of
better “fitness to
methods of practice
disability medicine”
assessment. as are
used by
several
institutions
of
countries
other than
India.
4. Disability (a) Chronic (i) Multiple Less than 40% 80% More than
caused Neurological Sclerosis 40% Disability disability 80%
due to Conditions
(ii)
Parkinsonism
(b) Blood (i) Less than 40% 80% More than
Disorder Haemophilia 40% Disability disability 80%
s
(ii)
Thalassemia
(iii) Sickle cell
disease
5. Multiple More than one Must consider all above while deciding in
disabilities of the above individual cases recommendations with
including specified respect to presence any of the above,
deaf disabilities namely, visual, Hearing, Speech &
blindness Language disability, Intellectual Disability,
and Mental Illness as a component of
Multiple Disability.
63
Combining formula as notified by the
related Gazette Notification issued by the
Govt. of India
a+b (90-a)
90
(where a=higher value of disability % and
b=lower value of disability % as calculated
for different disabilities)
Is recommended for computing the disability
arising when more than one disabling
condition is present in a given individual.
This formula may be used in cases with
multiple disabilities, and recommendations
regarding admission and/or reservation
made as per the specific disabilities present
in a given individual
Note: For selection under PwD category, candidates will be required to produce
Disability Certificate before their schedule date of counselling from one of the disability
assessment boards as designated by concerned Authority of Government of India.
Conclusion: He / She is Eligible/Not Eligible for admission in Indian
Medicine courses as per the CCIM Gazette Notification subject to his
being otherwise medically fit.
Functional competency with the aid of Assistive devices in case of
Locomotor*/Visual*/Hearing* Impairment, if any
Sign.&Name Sign. & Name Sign. & Name
___________
(Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist)
Note:
1. The selected candidates have to undergo a second medical examination by a
medical board constituted for this purpose by the Director of Medical Education to
ascertain and confirm the nature and extent of physically disability.
2. The decision of the Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy in this regard will
be final.
64
ANNEXURE – VIII(a)
First Graduate Tuition Fee Concession Certificate
(G.O.Ms. No. 85, Higher Education (J2) Dept., dt: 16-04-2010
CERTIFICATE
It is to certified that there is no Graduate in the family of Selvan / Selvi
................................................. S/o / D/o Thiru..................................................... presently
residing at ............................................................................................................................
And who has applied for Professional Course during the year 2025, is eligible only for
tuition fees exemption as per the G.O. Ms. No. 85, Higher Education (J2) Dept., dt: 16-04-
2010.
Relationship
Father / Mother / Educational Whether
S. Name Brother Age qualification Degree
No. / Sister/ Grand holder
Father / Grand
mother
1
2
3
4
5
6
Station:
Date: Head Quarters Deputy Tahsildar
65
Taluk:
District:
66
ANNEXURE- VIII (b)
(G.O.Ms. No. 85, Higher Education (J2) Dept., dt: 16-04-2010
FIRST GRADUATION CONCESSION JOINT DECLARATION FORM
I hereby declare that the details of my family members and their educational
qualification to avail the tuition fee waiver for my studies in professional courses under the
scheme of waiver of only tuition fees to the students from a family in which there are no
Graduates.
Relationship
Father / Mother / Brother Educational Whether
S. Name / Sister/ Grand Father / Age qualification Degree
No. Grand mother holder
1
2
3
4
5
6
I hereby solemnly and sincerely affirm that I am the first and only person from my
family to claim the waiver of only tuition fees for the entire professional course of study and
there is no graduate in my family so far. The particulars furnished above are true. Should it,
however, be found that any information furnished therein is false in material particulars on
verification at later stage, I am liable for criminal prosecution and I also agree, to return
amount equal to 3 times the tuition fee waiver availed by me.
Date:
Place: Signature of the candidate
I solemnly and sincerely affirm that I am fully aware of the above declaration and the
particulars furnished in the declaration are correct. I am liable for the criminal action /
recovery of amount equal to 3 times of the fees waived, for incorrect particulars
furnished.
Date:
Place: Signature of the parent/ guardian
67
ANNEXURE – IX
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE FOR ADMINISTRATION OF HEPATITIS-B VACCINATION
I, Dr ................................................................. Registration No. ..............................
certify that I have this day .................................... of ............................. 2025 administered
the Hepatitis-B Vaccine to the candidate whose particulars are given below:
1. Name of the Candidate
2. Father’s Name
3. Sex
4. Age
5. Identification marks: I.
II.
6. DOSE I / II / III
Signature of the Applicant Signature of Medical Officer
Place: Name and Designation
Date: Officer Seal
68
ANNEXURE X
INCOME CERTIFICATE
(This Certificate should be issued by an Officer of Revenue Department not below the
rank of Tahsildar in the Taluk concerned.)
Name of the Applicant…………………………………... Application No……………. This
is to certify that Annual income of Thiru / Thirumathi
………………………………………………… (Parent Name) Parent/Guardian* of Thiru /
Thirumathi……………………………………….……………………………. ……………...
an applicant for (Applicant Name) Admission to BNYS course in Government / Self-
financing Colleges in Tamil Nadu residing at
...................................................................................... is Rs ...................
(Rupees…………………………………………………………...only).
Name and Signature:
Designation:
Office Seal:
Date: Station:
Note:
*Applicable only when both parents are deceased
1. This Certificate should not be issued by Special Tahsildars. Deputy Tahsildars
such as Loans, Land acquisition. Election, Excise and HQs. Deputy Tahsildars,
Special Deputy Collectors, Asst. Commissioner of Agricultural income, Excise
and Elections etc.,
2. Candidates of SC/SCA/ST whose parents’ annual income is less than Rs.2.5
lakhs and claiming the fee concession for admission to Government Medical
College and Government Quota in Self Financing Medical Colleges should
produce the above Income Certificate (As per G.O.(Ms) No.51 AD and TW
Department, dated 07-08-2013 in Original at the time of Counseling
Compulsorily.
69
ANNEXURE - XI
AGREEMENT BOND FORM FOR CANDIDATES ADMITTED FOR B.N.Y.S.
COURSE FOR 2025-2026 ACADEMIC YEAR
This agreement made this ..................... day of ……………………. month of
2025 between/with Governor of Tamil Nadu (hereinafter called the Governor which
expression shall, where the context so admits include his successor in office) of one
part and .................................... son/daughter of ..........................................resident
of………………. in the....................................... Taluk
of…………………………………... District (hereinafter called the candidates) which
expression shall, where the context so admits include his/her heirs, executors,
administrators and representatives of the other part.
WHEREAS the candidate has, on his/her application been selected to undergo
training for the B.N.Y.S. course in the Government / Self Financing Medical College
(hereinafter referred to as the said College).
AND WHEREAS the candidate has agreed to complete his / her training for the
said course, at the said College subject to the conditions hereinafter appearing.
Now THEREFORE, this agreement witnesses and it is hereby
agreed as follows:
1. The Candidate shall diligently complete his/her training for the said course at the
said College, shall abide by the rules of the said Colleges for the time being in
force regulating the conduct of students at the said College and shall pass all the
examinations prescribed for the said course by the University or the Medical
Institution concerned.
2. Upon passing the final B.N.Y.S. Examination the candidate shall serve as
“Intern” for the prescribed period as laid down by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R.
Medical University, Chennai.
3. (i) The candidate shall on demand made by the Government within two years
from the date on which he/she registers himself/herself as a Medical
Practitioner, serve for a period of not less than five years and in such rural areas
as the Government may by general or special orders specify.
70
(ii) Those candidates who fail to comply with clause 3 (i) shall have to pay a
sum of Rs. 3,00,000/- (Rupees Three Lakhs only) or as the Government may
direct as penalty for having breached the contract in the bond.
4. During the period of Internship under clause (2) and while in service under
clause (3) the candidate shall faithfully, diligently and with skill and ability perform
his/her duties and observe the rules for the time being in force made by the
Governor or the President as the case may be for regulating the conduct of
Government Servants.
5. While in service under clause (3) the Pay and allowance and other conditions of
service of the candidate shall be regulated by the rules and orders of the
Government for the time being in force, for the posts to which he/she is
appointed.
6. Candidates who discontinue the course on or after the last cut-off date for
admission process for the academic session 2025-2026 and on any date of the
subsequent year are bound by the bond and thereby, they shall have to pay a
sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only) as penalty for having breached the
contract in the bond by means of Demand Draft drawn in favor of “The Director of
Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai-106” payable at Chennai.
Note: This penalty is only for candidates who discontinue the course and not for
re-allotment and movement from one to another College.
7. Any sum falling due from the candidate under this agreement shall be recovered
from him/her as an arrear of land revenue.
8. If any dispute shall arise between the parties hereto in respect of this agreement
or any of the provisions herein contained or anything arising hereunto except in
respect of matters on which the decisions of the Government under clause (6) is
declared to be final and binding, the same shall be referred to the arbitration of
Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy whose decision thereon shall be
final and binding on the parties.
9. The witness shall bear the stamp duty payable in respect of this agreement if
required. In witness whereof the parties here to have appended their signature
hereunto on the dates respectively mentioned against the signature.
Signature of the Candidate
and Date
Witnesses: 1.
71
2.
Signature of the Parent/Guardian
and full address
72
To
The Governor of Tamil Nadu
Whereas the Governor has, in order to secure due performance of the above
agreement, demanded security from the candidates.
Now, therefore, in consideration of the admission of the candidate to the said
College and his/her continuance there, for training as aforesaid and at the request of
the candidate.
(i)..................................................... Son /Daughter of.............................................
...................................................... Resident of.......................................................
……………………………………………………………………………………………..
Taluk of ............................................. in the District of .........................................
(ii)..................................................... Son /Daughter of.............................................
...................................................... Resident of.......................................................
……………………………………………………………………………………………..
Taluk of ............................................. in the District of .........................................
(iii)..................................................... Son /Daughter of.............................................
...................................................... Resident of.......................................................
…………………………………………………………………………………………..
Taluk of ............................................. in the District of .........................................
hereinafter called ‘The Sureties’ on behalf of the candidate do hereby jointly and
severally agree that in the event of the candidate committing any breach of any term
of the above agreement to which breach the decision of the Government shall be final
and binding on the sureties we shall pay to the Government on demand and without
the demur sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh only) or as the Government may
direct and we hereby bind ourselves as representatives for such payment. We further
agree that any sum due hereunder shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.
We also agree that notwithstanding the provisions of sections 133 and 135 of
the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (Central Act IX of 1872) or any other rule of law or
equity in that behalf any indulgence of forbearance shown by the Government to the
73
candidate or any variance in the terms of the contract with the candidate whether with
or without the consent of the sureties or either of this shall not operate as a discharge
of the sureties obligation under this bond.
Signed by us this .......................................... day
of.......................... 2025
Witness:
1.
2.
1. Signature of First Surety / Parent or Guardian of Candidate Full address:
2. Signature of Second Surety and Full Address:
3. Signature of Third Surety and Full Address:
74
ANNEXURE- XII
Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent/Guardian
(This should not be enclosed with the application but should be submitted at the
time of admission)
I/WE do hereby solemnly and sincerely affirm
1. That the statements made and information furnished in the application
submitted and also in all the enclosures thereto submitted by him/her are true.
Should it however be found that any information furnished therein is untrue in
material particulars, I/We realize that he/she is liable for criminal prosecution
and forfeiture of his / her seat in the Institution allotted during the counselling.
2. That my son/daughter/ward would conform strictly to all the rules and
regulations prescribed by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University,
Chennai in force now or which may be introduced in the Institution hereafter
and that I/We realize that breach of discipline and rules on my son’s/
daughter’s/ ward’s part would entail forfeiture of his/her seat in the Institution.
3. That my son/daughter/ward shall not make any claim for admission to a
particular College as a matter of right during allotment/Re-allotment.
4. That my son/daughter/ward agrees to pay any amount that may be become
due as and when the fee structure is revised as may be decided by
Government of Tamil Nadu /Committee appointed by the Government for the
purpose.
5. That my son/daughter/ward do hereby agree to conform to follow the rules and
regulations including those relating to the hostel laid down or to be laid down
by the Dean of the Institution for due maintenance of discipline at the said
College and assure that he/she will not join my agitation /strike of any kind
during course of study and further agree to make good when called upon to do
so to the Government of Tamil Nadu any damage to furniture, apparatus or
other articles which may be caused by any carelessness negligence and
wantonly on his/her part.
6. That my son/daughter/ward who is a Native of Tamil Nadu and will not claim
dual Nativity in future.
7. That my son/daughter/ward hereby declares that he/she belongs to
75
……………. Community (Sub caste …………………...) and is fully aware the
producing a false Community certificate leads to expulsion from any course of
study at any time besides initiation of criminal action against him/her as per
law.
8. That we are fully aware, as per the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India and Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Ragging Act,1997, Ragging is an offence,
and is banned in the Institution and anyone indulging in ragging is liable to be
punished by expulsion from the Institution and / or rigorous imprisonment up to
3 years, and /or fine up to Rs.25,000/-
Place:
Date: Signature of Candidate Signature of the
Parent/Guardian
76
ANNEXURE –XIII(a)
UNDERTAKING REGARDING AUTHORISATION
I, …………………………………………………………………………………………
Son/ daughter of Thiru ……………………………………………………… aged
……………………… years A.R. number …………………………. and General Rank
……………………… in the Rank list for BNYS 2025-2026 session do hereby
solemnly affirm and undertake that the decision of my authorized representative,
Thiru / Tmt /Selvi ………………………………………………………… Son / Daughter /
Wife of ……………………………………. Thiru ……………………… aged ………….
years, regarding selection / rejection of seat on the date of counseling (……………...)
shall be binding on me and I shall not have any claim what so ever, other than the
decision taken by my authorized representative on my behalf on
……………………………………………
Signature of the Candidate
Name: ………………………………….
A.R.No: ……………………………….
General Rank: ……………………….
Address:
77
ANNEXURE –XIII(b)
AUTHORISATION LETTER
I, ………………………………………………………………………. son / daughter of
Thiru ……………………………………………………………………………….…….………...
bearing
A.R. number …………………. and General Rank …………….………. in the Rank list for
B.N.Y.S Course 2025 - 2026 session do hereby authorize, Thiru/ Tmt / Selvi
………………………………… Son / Daughter of Thiru
………………………...……………...……… to represent me on ……………………… before
the Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy, Chennai
for allotment of a seat in B.N.Y.S courses 2025-2026 session.
The signature and the photograph of the above-named Thiru / Tmt / Selvi
……………………………………… are attested below.
Photograph of Candidate Name:
Signature of the Candidate: Application Number:
General Rank:
Photograph of authorized Signature of authorized
Representative attested by Representative duly
The candidate attested by the candidate
78
ANNEXURE –IX
FAQ’S REGARDING COUNSELLING PROCESS
Q.No.1: How to apply for BNYS UG Medical Degree Course admission in Tamil Nadu?
Ans: After the HSC 2025 results are out, there will be notification in the websites
www.tnayushselection.org, www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in for application to BNYS UG
Medical Degree Course admission in Tamil Nadu. Candidates are advised to Register
them to create User Name and Password after that login using their User Name and
Password. Candidates are advised to read this prospectus carefully and apply through
the website in Online mode only.
Note: Cost of applying online: Rs.500/- (SC/SCA/ST candidates are exempted)
Q.No. 2: I have applied online. Is this enough for getting a seat?
Ans: No. Applying online is just the first stage in the entire process. Once all the
applications are received and scrutinized Eligible Merit List of Candidates (Candidates
who have applied and are found eligible) will be published in the websites. After this
Candidates have to register for the counselling process as mentioned in the scheme
of counselling.
Q. No. 3: How do I register for the counselling?
Ans.: After the Merit List is published candidates have to register before the onset of
counselling by paying the non-refundable online Processing Fee of Rs.500/- in the
website after logging in using the same credentials (User Name, Password) used
during the application process. Registration is allowed before Round 1, Round 3 and
Stray Round and Fresh registration is not allowed before Round 2 (as this is a re-
allottment Round)
Note: Counselling Registration is allowed only for already applied candidates who are
in the Eligible Merit list and not for those candidates who have not at all applied to
BNYS UG Medical Degree Course.
Q. No. 4: How and when I had to make the payment?
Ans: After completion of Choice filling, payment page appears automatically. Candidate
can do online payment by Net Banking / Credit card/ Debit card. Only after the
successful payment, candidate can submit their choice filling.
79
Q. No. 5: Is there any restriction for filling up number of choices of Institution (College) in
choice filling form?
Ans: No, you can give as many choices as you wish during online choice filling. However,
choices should be in order of your preference. There will be a common software for
Government Quota / Government Surrendered seats for filling up of choices. The
choices will be available based on your eligibility and application.
Q. No.6: Is it necessary to fill up the choices and lock the choices to get seat allotted? Or I
will be allotted seat automatically from leftover seats?
Ans: After online registration (registration is compulsory to take part in online allotment
process, before the counselling Rounds during specified registration period), you have
to fill in choice of Institution/College/Course in order of your preference. Once choice
is filled in, it can be modified before locking it. If candidate does not lock the choice
submitted by him/her, the choices already filled will be automatically locked as per
counselling schedule.
Note: If the candidate does not fill choices for any College, will not be allotted any seat
during the counselling
IMPORTANT:
Don’t wait till the last minute to Register and Lock your choices. Please go through
your submitted choices before locking, as once you lock the choices they cannot be
modified or changed even if you have made a mistake. It may result in allotment of a
seat which you never wanted. (Please note that the choices once locked cannot be
unlocked even by the Selection Committee)
Q. No. 7: Is it necessary to join allotted College of Round 1 to get chance to participate in
Round 2?
Ans: No, candidates need not report or join the allotted College of Round 1 since there is
free exit.
However, if they want to retain the Round 1 seat and upgrade in Round 2 they have to
physically join the College of Round 1 and participate in Round 2 online.
Q. No. 8: Can a candidate participate in Round 2 without submitting fresh choices (based on
choices submitted before Round-1)?
Ans: Fresh choice submission by eligible candidates, as mentioned above is necessary for
consideration for seat allotment during any Round. If candidate does not submit fresh
80
choice(s) during choice filling period, the candidate will not be considered for allotment
of seat during Round- 2 and will retain the already joined seat, if any
Q. No.9: If I opt to participate in Round 2 of counselling whether my allotted seat
(of Round 1) will be cancelled?
Ans: In case you are not allotted any seat in the Round 2, you will retain earlier allotted
seat in Round 1 if you had joined already. However, on re-allotment of a seat in
Round 2, the earlier allotted seat in Round 1 will automatically be cancelled and
allotted to another candidate. Therefore, you are advised to fill in only choices which
you prefer over the earlier allotted seat, for Round 2.
Q. No. 10: - What is the procedure for Round 3 Counselling which will be conducted by
Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee for BNYS Medical Degree Course?
Ans. Since reallotment is allowed in Round-3, The net vacant seats due to Not allotted /
non joining, non-reporting of Round 2 and any converted seats due to lack of
candidates in the particular quota and the virtual vacancies will be published in the
seat matrix and eligible candidates have to submit fresh choices and the result will
be processed as per Choice & Merit applying the rule of Reservation.
Q. No. 12: How much time will I be given to join the allotted College?
Ans: Candidates allotted seats will be required to join the allotted College / Course within
the stipulated time which is mentioned in counselling schedule. However, candidates
are advised to join as early as possible and not to wait for last day of joining, due to
different schedule of holiday (including local holidays) / working hours in various Yoga
& Naturopathy Medical Colleges. Therefore, candidates are advised to contact allotted
College immediately after declaration of result of counselling allotment process, to
know the details. If candidate fails to join the allotted College within stipulated time,
then the allotted seat will be cancelled. For Round 3 and Stray Round as there is very
little time for the entire counselling process and there is no process of
reallotment/resignation, downloading of allotment order after payment of Tuition Fees
will be considered as Joined. But the candidate has to report to the allotted College
within the stipulated time. If the candidate does not report candidates will be treated
as Discontinued and his seat will be considered vacant and candidates will forfeit the
advance Tuition Fees.
81
Please note that under no circumstances date of joining/date of reporting can be
extended by the Selection Committee.
Q. No. 13: What documents are required at the time of Joining/ Reporting to allotted
College?
Ans: The following original documents (along with attested photocopies) are required at the
time of joining/reporting to the allotted College:
i. Class X Mark Sheet
ii. Class XI Mark Sheet
iii. H.S.C. Mark sheet or any other equivalent examination.
iv. Transfer certificate obtained after the completion of H.S.C / equivalent
examination or any other courses.
v. Certificate for proof of study from VI Std. to XII Std for the candidates who
have studied completely in Tamil Nadu.
vi. Community Certificate
vii. Nativity certificate.
viii. Eligibility Certificate (if applicable)
ix. Migration certificate (if applicable)
x. Special Category Certificate (if applicable)
Q. No. 14: In case candidate had to apply for both Govt. Quota in SF Colleges and for
management quota should the candidate pay the fee for both?
Ans. Yes. As per the policy, the candidate has to pay both the fees. In this case the
candidate will have to pay fee for GQ in SF Colleges. Rs.10,000/- plus for MQ
Rs.25,000/- as Advance Tuition Fee in addition to the Online Processing Fee Rs.500/-
for GQ and Rs.1000/- for MQ.
Q. No.15: Will the Selection Committee bear the bank charges incurred by the candidate
while registering for counselling?
Ans: No. Bank Charges if any, incurred by the candidate should be borne by the candidate
only.
Q. No.16: Will the Selection Committee pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition Fee?
82
Ans: No. The Selection Committee will not pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition
Fee.
Q. No. 17: If I forget my password that I have created during the process of registration, how
to retrieve it?
Ans: To retrieve the forgotten password, system facilitates the following process:
The candidate is required to enter the information that candidates filled at the time of
registration and then security question & answer thereon to be entered as given
during New Candidate registration process. The above data submitted by candidate
will be validated with the registered candidate’s database. If the above entries match,
then only the candidate would be permitted to enter new password to proceed further.
IMPORTANT:
Please keep the information same as that you have furnished on the application form
confidential, and do not share the password and OTP with anybody as to register for
online allotment process and submit choice you need that information. If somebody
else uses that information, candidates can misuse your online registration and prevent
you from taking part in online allotment process. Keep print out of application form
ready for reference with you.
83
LIST OF ANNEXURES
ANNEXURES Name
Annexure - I Special categories with their Code Numbers
Annexure - II List of Government Yoga & Naturopathy Medical Colleges
Annexure - III List of Self-financing Yoga & Naturopathy Medical Colleges
Annexure – IV Certificate of Nativity of Tamil Nadu
Annexure - V Certificate of Department of Ex-Servicemen’s Welfare
Annexure - VI Details of selection of Candidates under Quota for Eminent Sports
Persons
Annexure– VI (A) Declaration of the Candidate for Sports Quota
Annexure - VII Certificate of Disability
Annexure–VIII (a) First Graduate Tuition Fee Concession Certificate
Annexure–VIII(b) First Graduate Concession Joint Declaration form
Annexure – IX Medical Certificate for Administration of Hepatitis-B vaccination
Annexure – X Income Certificate
Annexure – XI Agreement bond form for Candidates admitted for BNYS Course
Annexure – XII Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent / Guardian
Annexure – XIII-A Undertaking regarding authorization
Annexure – XIII-B Authorisation letter
Annexure – IX FAQs regarding Counselling Process
84
LIST OF COMMUNITIES
2025-2026
LIST SHOWING THE SCHEDULED
CASTES,
SCHEDULED TRIBES, BACKWARD
CLASSES, BACKWARD CLASS-
MUSLIMS,
MOST BACKWARD CLASSES
AND
DENOTIFIED
COMMUNITIES IN THE
STATE OF TAMILNADU
LIST OF COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE OF TAMILNADU
LISTOF BACKWARD CLASSES, MOST BACKWARD CLASSES,
DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES THROUGH OUT THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU
UNLESS AND OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
1. G.O.Ms.No.85 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 29.7.2008
2. G.O.Ms.No.96, Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 8.9.2008
3. G.O.Ms.No.97 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 11.9.2008
4. G.O.Ms.No.37 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 21.5.2009
5. G.O.Ms.No.98 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 5.1.2009.
85
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASSES
Sl.No Name of the Caste
1. Agamudayar including Thozhu or Thuluva Vellala
2. AgaramVellan Chettiar
3. Alwar, Azhavar and Alavar(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli
District.)
4. Servai (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Pudukottai Districts.)
5. Nulayar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
6. Archakarai Vellala
7. Aryavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
8. Ayira Vaisyar
9. Badagar
10. Billava
11. Bondil
12. Boyas (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem,
Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts).
PeddaBoyar (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
Oddars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai,Theni and Dindigul Districts)
Kaloddars (except Kancheepuram, Chegalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukkottai, Tiruchirappalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
Nellorepet oddars (except Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
Sooramari oddars (except Salem and Namakkal Districts)
13 Chakkala (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts)
14. Chavalakarar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
15. Chettuor Chetty (including Kottar Chetty, ElurChetty, Pathira Chetty, Valayal Chetty,
Pudukadai Chetty)(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
16. Chowdry
16(A) Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Castes irrespective of the generation of conversion
(except the Paravar conversion to Christianity of Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk
of Tenkasi District) for the purpose of reservation of seats in Educational Institutions and for
seats in Public Services.
16(B). C.S.I formerly S.I.U.C (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
86
17. Donga Dasaris (except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts.
18. Devangar,Sedar
19. Dombs (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
Dommars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Thiruvannamalai Districts)
20. Enadi
21. Ezhavathy (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
22. Ezhuthachar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
23. Ezhuva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
24. Gangavar
25. Gavara, Gavarai and Vadugar (Vaduvar) (other than Kamma, Kapu, Balija and Reddi)
26. Gounder
27. Gowda (including Gammala, Kalali and Anuppa Gounder)
28. Hegde
29. Idiga
30. Illathu Pillaimar, Illuvar, Ezhuvar and Illathar
31. Jhetty
32. Jogis (Except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
33. Kabbera
34 Kaikolar, Sengunthar
35. Kaladi(exceptSivaganga,Virudhunagar,Ramanathapuram,Madurai,Theni,
Dindigul,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
36. Kalari Kurup including Kalari Panicker (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk
of Tenkasi District)
37. Kalingi
38. Kallar, Easanattu Kallar , Gandharva Kottai Kallars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Tiruvarur, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts).
Kootappal Kallars (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur
Districts)
Piramalai Kallars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur Districts)
Periyasooriyur Kallars (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
39. Kallar Kula Thondaman
87
40. Kalveli Gounder
41. Kambar
42. Kammalar or Viswakarma, Viswakarmala (including Thattar, Porkollar, Kannar, Karumar,
Kollar, Thacher, Kal Thacher, Kamsala and Viswa brahmin.)
43. Kani, Kanisu, Kaniyar Panicker
44. Kaniyala Vellalar
45. Kannada Saineegar, Kannadiyar (Throughout the State) and Dasapalanjika (Coimbatore,
Erode, Tiruppur and the Nilgiris Districts)
46. Kannadiya Naidu
47. Karpoora Chettiar
48. Karuneegar (Seer Karuneegar, Sri Karuneegar, Sarattu Karuneegar, Kaikatti Karuneegar,
Mathuvazhi Kanakkar, Sozhi Kanakkar and Sunnambu Karuneegar)
49. Kasukkara Chettiar
50. Katesar, Pattamkatti
51. Kavuthiyar
52. Kerala Mudali
53. Kharvi
54. Khatri
55. Kongu Vaishnava
56. Kongu Vellalars( including Vellala Gounder, Nattu Gounder, Narambukkatti Gounder,
Tirumudi Vellalar, Thondu Vellalar, Pala Gounder, Poosari Gounder, Anuppa Vellala
Gounder, Padaithalai Gounder, Chendalai Gounder, Pavalankatti Vellala Gounder,
Palavellala Gounder, Sanku Vellala Gounder and Rathinagiri Gounder).
57. Koppala Velama
58. Koteyar
59. Krishnavaka (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
60. Kudikara Vellalar
61. Kudumbi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
62. Kuga Vellalar
63. Kunchidigar
63(A) Latin Catholics except Latin Catholic Vannar in Kanniyakumari District.
63(B) Lathin Catholics in Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
64. Lambadi
65. Lingayat (Jangama)
66. Mahratta (Non-Brahmin)(including Namdev Mahratta)
67. Malayar
88
68. Male
69. Maniagar
70. Maravars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinum , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
71. Moondrumandai Enbathunalu (84) Ur.Sozhia Vellalar
72. Mooppan
73. Muthuraja, Muthiriyar, Muttiriyar, Mutharaiyar
74. Nadar, Shanar and Gramani including Christian Nadar, Christian Shanar and Christian
Gramani.
75. Nagaram
76. Naikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
77. Nangudi Vellalar
78. Nanjil Mudali (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
79. Odar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
80. Odiya
81. Oottruvalanattu Vellalar
82. O.P.S.Vellalar
83. Ovachar
84. Paiyur Kotta Vellalar
85. Pamulu
86. Panar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
community is a Scheduled Caste)
86A Pandiya Vellalar
87 -Omitted-
88. Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District
89. Pannirandam Chettiar or Uthama Chettiar
90. Parkavakulam (including Surithimar, Nathamar, Malayamar, Moopanar and Nainar)
91. Perike (including Perike Balija)
92. Perumkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
93. Podikara Vellalar
94. Pooluva Gounder
95. Poraya
96. Pulavar (in Coimbatore and Tiruppur Districts)
97. Pulluvar or Pooluvar
98. Pusala
99. Reddy (Ganjam)
100. Sadhu Chetty (including Telugu Chetty, Twenty four Manai Telungu Chetty)
89
101. Sakkaravar or Kavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District )
102. Salivagana
103. Saliyar, Padmasaliyar, Pattusaliyar, Pattariyar and Adhaviyar
104. Savalakkarar
105. Senaithalaivar, Senaikudiyar and Illaivaniar
105A Serakula Vellalar
106. Sourashtra (Patnulkarar)
107. Sozhiavellalar (including Sozha Vellalar, Vetrilaikarar, Kodikalkarar and Keeraikarar)
108. Srisayar
109. Sundaram Chetty
109A Thiyya
110. Thogatta Veerakshatriya
111. Tholkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
112. Tholuva Naicker and Vetalakara Naicker
113 -Omitted-
114. Thoriyar
115. Ukkirakula Kshatriya Naicker
116. Uppara, Uppillia and Sagara
117. Urali Gounder ( except Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
District) and Orudaya Gounder or Oorudaya Gounder (in Madurai ,Theni, Dindigul,
Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai,
Salem and Namakkal Districts )
118. Urikkara Nayakkar
118A Virakodi Vellala
119 Vallambar
119.A Vallanattu Chettiar
120. Valmiki
121. Vaniyar, Vania Chettiar (including Gandla, Ganika, Telikula and Chekkalar)
122. Veduvar and Vedar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
123. Veerasaiva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
124. Velar
125. Vellan Chettiar
126. Veluthodathu Nair (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
Vokkaligar (including Vakkaligar, Okkaligar, Kappiliyar, Kappiliya, Okkaliga Gowda, Okkaliya-
127.
Gowder, Okkaliya Gowda )
90
128. Wynad Chetty (The Nilgiris District)
Yadhava (including Idaiyar, Telugu Speaking Idaiyar known as Vaduga Ayar or Vaduga Idaiyar
129.
or Golla and Asthanthra Golla)
130. Yavana
131. Yerukula
Converts to Christianity from any Hindu Backward Classes Community or Most Backward
Classes Community or Denotified Communities (except the Converts to Christianity from
131A
Meenavar, Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar, Mukkuvar or Mukayar and
Paravar)
Orphans and destitute children who have lost their parents before reaching the age of ten and
are destitutes; and who have nobody else to take care of them either by law or custom; and
132. also who are admitted into any of the schools or orphanages run by the Government or
recognized by the Government.
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASS MUSLIMS
1. Ansar
2. Dekkani Muslims
3. Dudekula
4. Labbais including Rowthar and Marakayar (whether their spoken language is Tamil or Urdu)
5. Mapilla
6. Sheik
7. Syed
LIST OF MOST BACKWARDS CLASSES COMMUNITIES
1 Ambalakarar
2 Andipandaram
2(A) Arayar (in Kanniyakumari District)
3 Bestha, Siviar
4 Bhatraju (other than Kshatriya Raju)
5 Boyar, Oddar
6 Dasari
7 Dommara
8 Eravallar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where
the community is a Scheduled Tribe )
91
9 Isaivellalar
10 Jambuvanodai
11 Jangam
12 Jogi
13 Kongu Chettiar (in Coimbatore and Erode Districts only)
14 Koracha
15 Kulala (including Kuyavar and Kumbarar)
16 Kunnuvar Mannadi
17 Kurumba, Kurumba Gounder
18 Kuruhini Chetty
18(A) Latin Catholic Christian Vannar (in Kanniyakumari District)
19 Maruthuvar, Navithar, Mangala, Velakattalavar, Velakatalanair and Pronopakari
20 Mond Golla
21 Moundadan Chetty
22 Mahendra, Medara
23 Mutlakampatti
24 Narikoravar (Kurivikars)
25 Nokkar
25(A) Panisaivan/Panisivan
Vanniakula Kshatriya (including Vanniyar, Vanniya, Vannia Gounder, Gounder or Kander,
26
Padayachi, Palli and Agnikula Kshatriya)
27 Paravar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
Community is a Scheduled Caste)
27A Paravar converts to Christianity including the Paravar converts to Christianity of
Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk in Tenkasi District.
28 Meenavar (Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar) (including converts to Christianity )
29 Mukkuvar or Mukayar (including converts to Christianity)
30 Punnan Vettuva Gounder
31 Pannayar (other than Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District)
32 Sathatha Srivaishnava (including Sathani, Chattadi and Chattada Srivaishnava)
33 Sozhia Chetty
34 Telugupatty Chetty
35 Thottia Naicker ( including Rajakambalam, Gollavar, Sillavar, Thockalavar , Thozhuva
Naicker and Erragollar)
36 Thondaman
36(A) Thoraiyar (Nilgris)
92
36(B) Thoraiyar (Plains)
36(C) Transgender or Eunuch (Thirunangai or Aravani)
37 Valaiyar (including Chettinad Valayars)
38 Vannar (Salavai Thozhilalar)(including Agasa, Madivala, Ekali, Rajakula, Veluthadar and
Rajaka) (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
community is a Scheduled Caste)
39 Vettaikarar
40 Vettuva Gounder
41 Yogeeswarar
LIST OF DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
1 Attur Kilnad Koravars (Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore, Villupuram, kallakurichi,
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga and Virudhunagar Districts)
2 Attur Melnad Koravars (Salem and Namakkal District)
3 Appanad Kondayamkottai Maravar (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai,
Theni and Dindigul Districts )
4 Ambalakarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
5 Ambalakkarar (Suriyanur, Tiruchirapalli District)
6 Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem, Namakkal,
Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts)
7 Battu Turkas
8 C.K.Koravars (Cuddalore, Villupuram and Kallakurichi Districts)
9 Chakkala (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Madurai,
Theni, Dindigul and the Nilgiris Districts)
10 Changyampudi Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
11 Chettinad Valayars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
12 Dombs (Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
13 Dobba Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
14 Dommars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
15 Donga Boya
16 Donga Ur.Korachas
93
17 Devagudi Talayaris
18 Dobbai Korachas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts )
19 Dabi Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts )
20 Donga Dasaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
21 Gorrela Dodda Boya
22 Gudu Dasaris
23 Gandarvakottai Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Cuddalore, Villupuram and
Kallakurichi Districts)
24 Gandarvakottai Kallars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and
Pudukottai Districts)
25 Inji Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
26 Jogis (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Chennai, Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
27 Jambavanodai
28 Kaladis (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and
Ariyalur Districts )
29 Kal Oddars (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai,
Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem
and Namakkal Districts)
30 Koravars (Kancheepuram , Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Pudukottai,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Thiravarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukadi, Chennai,
Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts )
31 Kalinji Dabikoravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai
Districts)
32 Kootappal Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
33 Kala Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
94
34 Kalavathila Boyas
35 Kepmaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur
Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts )
36 Maravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi and Toothukudi
Districts)
37 Monda Koravars
38 Monda Golla (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
39 Mutlakampatti (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalaur and Pudukottai Districts)
40 Nokkars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
41 Nellorepet Oddars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
42 Oddars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts)
43 Pedda Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
44 Ponnai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
45 Piramalai Kallars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur Districts)
46 Peria Suriyur Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalurand Pudukottai Districts)
47 Padayachi (Vellayan Kuppam in Cuddalore District and Tennore in Tiruchirapalli District )
48 Punnan Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts )
49 Servai (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
50 Salem Melnad Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur,
Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Salem, Namakkal, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
51 Salem Uppu Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
52 Sakkaraithamadai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
53 Saranga Palli Koravars
54 Sooramari Oddars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
55 Sembanad Maravars (Sivaganga, Virudunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
56 Thalli Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
57 Telungapatti Chetis (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
95
58 Thottia Naickers (Sivaganga , Virudunagar, Ramanathapuram, Kancheepuram,
Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi,
Salem, Namakkal, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet, Tiruvannamalai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
59 Thogamalai Koravars or Kepmaris (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai Districts)
60 Uppukoravars or Settipalli Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts)
61 Urali Gounders (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
62 Wayalpad or Nawalpeta Korachas
63 Vaduvarpatti Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
64 Valayars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur Pudukottai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
65 Vettaikarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts)
66 Vetta Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
67 Varaganeri Koravars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
68 Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED CASTES)
1 Adi Andhra
2 Adi Dravida
3 Adi Karnataka
4 Ajila
5 Aruthathiyar
6 Ayyanavar (in Kanyakumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
7 Baira
8 Bakuda
9 Bandi
10 Bellara
11 Bharata (In Kanykumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District.
96
12 Chakkiliyan
13 Chalavadi
14 Chamar, Muchi
15 Chandala
16 Cheruman
17 Devendrakula Velalar (Devendrakulanathan, Kadaiyan (excluding in the coastal areas of
Tirunalveli, thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Tiruvarur and
Nagapattinam district), Kalladi, Kudumban, Pallan, Pannadi, Vathiriyan)
18 Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano
19 Domban
20 Godagali
21 Godda
22 Gosangi
23 Holeya
24 Jaggali
25 Jambuvulu
26 Kadaiyan (in the districts of Tirunelveli, Thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai,
Thanjavur, Tiruvarrur and Nagapattinam)
27 Kakkalan (in kanyakumari districts and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
28 -Omitted-
29 Kanakkan, Padanna (in the Nilgiris district)
30 Karimpalan
31 Kavara (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
32 Koliyan
33 Koosa
34 Kootan, Koodan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
35 -Omitted-
36 Kuravan, Sidhanar
37 Madari
38 Madiga
39 Maila
40 Mala
41 Mannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
42 Mavilan
43 Mager
44 Mundala
97
45 Nalakeyava
46 Nayadi
47 Padannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
48 Pagadi
49 -Omitted-
50 Palluvan
51 Pambada
52 Panan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
53 Panchama
54 -Omitted-
55 Panniandi
56 Paraiyan, Parayan, Sambavar
57 Paravan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
58 Pathiyan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
59 Pulayan, Cheramar
60 Puthirai Vannan
61 Raneyar
62 Samagara
63 Samban
64 Sapari
65 Semman
66 Thandan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
67 Thoti
68 Tiruvalluvar
69 Vallon
70 Valluvan
71 Vannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
72 -Omitted-
73 Velan
74 Vetan (in Kanyakumari and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
75 Vettiyan
76 Vettuvan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah of Tirunelvelli district)
98
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED TRIBES) TAMILNADU
1. Adiyan
2. Aranadan
3. Eravallan
4. Irular.
5. Kadar
6. Kammara (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
7. Kanikaran, Kanikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah and
Ambasamudram taluk of Tirunelveli District).
8. Kaniyan, Kanyan.
9. Kattunayakan.
10. Kochu Velan.
11. Konda Kapus.
12. Kondareddis.
13. Koraga.
14. Kota (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
15. Kudiya, Melakudi.
16. Kurichchan.
17. Kurumbas (in the Nilgiris District).
18. Kurumans.
19. MahaMalasar.
20. MalaiArayan.
21. MalaiPandaram.
22. Malai Vedan.
23. Malakkuravan.
24. Malasar.
25. Malayali (in Dharmapuri, Vellore, Pudukottai, Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore,
Tiruvannamalai, Villupuram, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur Districts).
26. Malayakandi.
27. Mannan.
28. Mudugar,Muduvan.
29. Muthuvan.
30. Pallayan.
31. Palliyan.
32. Palliyar.
33. Paniyan.
34. Sholaga.
35. Toda (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
36. Uraly.
99
100