GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
PROSPECTUS FOR ADMISSION TO
B.N.Y.S. [BACHELOR OF NATUROPATHY &
YOGIC SCIENCES]
UNDER MANAGEMENT QUOTA SEATS IN
SELF-FINANCING YOGA & NATUROPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGES
IN THE STATE OF TAMILNADU
2025 - 2026 Session
(As per G.O. (D) No. 674, Health and Family Welfare Dept.,
Dated: 26/06/2025 and as amended from time to time).
LAST DATE FOR SUBMISSION OF ONLINE APPLICATION
08.08.2025 up to 5.00 p.m.
SELECTION COMMITTEE,
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY,
ARIGNAR ANNA GOVT. HOSPITAL OF INDIAN MEDICINE CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI – 600 106.
Phone No: 044-26216244;
Websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in & www.tnayushselection.org
IMPORTANT DATES
1 Date of Notification
17.07.2025
2 Date of Commencement of online 17.07.2025
application
3 Last date for online submission of
08.08.2025 upto 5:00 P.M.
application
4 Date of declaration of Rank list Will be hosted in the official website.
5 Details of counselling Will be hosted in the official website.
6 Official website www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in ,
www.tnayushselection.org.
7 Helpline Number 044-26216244
2
S. No. INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CANDIDATES
1. Candidates seeking admission to B.N.Y.S. (Bachelor of Naturopathy and Yogic
Sciences) under Management Quota in Self-Financing Yoga and Naturopathy
Medical Colleges affiliated to the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, for the
academic session 2025-2026 can be accessed the application registration, from the
following official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in , www.tnayushselection.org.
2. Application for Tamil Nadu State 2025-2026 BNYS Management Quota Seats in Self-
Financing BNYS Medical Colleges, can only be submitted through online website
[www.tnayushselection.org] of Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy. Application submitted through any other mode will not
be entertained.
3. Qualified and eligible candidates are required to register ONLINE website
[www.tnayushselection.org] of Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian
Medicine and Homoeopathy to participate in the counselling process for allotment of
seat. Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee does not allot any seat manually.
4. Before filling up the online Application form, the candidates are advised to download
the prospectus and read all the instructions carefully along with parents/guardians.
5. Candidates are deemed to have read, agreed and accepted this Prospectus and the
terms and conditions of the counselling mentioned in this prospectus for Tamil Nadu
State 2025-2026 BNYS course Management Quota Seats in Self-Financing BNYS
Medical Colleges on completing the online submission of application form.
6. Candidates are further advised to fill the application form on their own in the
official website [www.tnayushselection.org] of Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy and not through any agent or
third party. Any mistake committed by the candidate will prejudice one’s selection.
7. a) The registration fee for the application form is Rs.1000/- (Rupees One
thousand only) (non-refundable) for all candidates irrespective of their
Categories and it should be paid through online Bank payment portal in the
website.
b) The last date for submission of online application form will be upto 5:00
3
P.M. on 01.08 .2025. Thereafter there is no provision for the candidates to
submit their online application form.
c) Candidates should fill up all mandatory columns, upload all required
documents and submit the duly filled in online application. The candidates
may download their filled in online application form and secure a copy of the
same for their future reference. Subsequent submission of supporting
document(s), is not accepted either on courier / post / or in person.
8. a. The candidates are instructed to visit the official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in
& www.tnayushselection.org at least twice a day for updates from the date of
issue of application till the end of admission process without fail. Further, any
changes or modification and relevant information pertaining to the counselling /
admission process will be made available in the above official website.
b. Selection Committee will not be responsible for consequences resulting due to
non-diligent follow up of notices, notification and publications appearing on the
website regarding admission to B.N.Y.S. Medical Degree course under
Management quota seats for the academic year 2025-2026.
9. Provisional rank list of the eligible candidates, online counselling schedule etc., will
be posted in the official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in &
www.tnayushselection.org. The Application Registration Number (A.R. No.) will
appear in the provisional rank list. No Individual communication / Intimation will
be made with regard to this.
10. The candidates allotted to B.N.Y.S. course Management Quota Seats in
Self-Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges through Selection
Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy,
Arumbakkam, Chennai, will alone be registered for B.N.Y.S. Course in The
Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University.
11. The prospectus is applicable for Management Quota Seats in the Self-Financing Yoga
and Naturopathy Medical Colleges, Tamil Nadu.
12. DURATION OF THE BNYS COURSE:
The duration of BNYS course is five and half years including one year of
Compulsory Rotatory Residential Internship.
4
13. PAYMENT DETAILS:
Christians
OC/BC/ converted
SC/SCA/ST TIME
BCM/MBC from
SC/SCA/ST
Registration fee
for online 1000 1000 While applying
application
Online Processing Before choice
1000 1000
fee filling
1. Rs. 10000 / - at
Advance Tuition Exempted the time of
fees for Self- (If income is less than 2.5 submission of
25000
Financing lakhs with valid Income choice filling.
(10000 +
Colleges under Certificate for Native of 2. Rs. 15000/- at
15000)
Management Tamil Nadu Candidates) the time of
Quota seats downloading the
all0otment order.
5
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
COMMISIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
PROSPECTUS FOR B.N.Y.S - MANAGEMENT COURSE
Sl.
PROSPECTUS
No.
I. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: -
1. Candidate should be a citizen of India. Foreign nationals are NOT eligible to apply for
admission to B.N.Y.S. course.
2. AGE LIMIT:
Candidates should have completed the age of Seventeen years on or before 31st
December 2025 for admission in the first year of the Course and there is no upper age
limit. Evidence for the age (e.g., Birth Certificate, 10th Mark Sheet, +2 Mark sheet, etc.)
should be uploaded.
3. EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS:
Candidates should have passed in all the subjects of the qualifying examination of the
a) Higher Secondary Certificate Examination conducted by The Tamil Nadu State Board or
any other equivalent Board in the following group of subjects along with English
individually.
(1) Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology. (or)
(2) Physics, Chemistry, Biology (or) Biotechnology with any other
subject.
Note: Candidates who have passed in other board of examination (i.e., other than the
Tamil Nadu State Board, CBSE and ISCE) with same subjects should produce the
Eligibility Certificate from The Tamil Nadu Dr. MGR Medical University at the time of
filling the online application, and submit the migration certificate received from the
respective Board / University to the College at the time of admission.
Candidates who have passed the qualifying examinations from National Institute of
b) Open Schooling* or State Open Schools* or as private candidates* from recognized
State Boards; or with Biology/Biotechnology as an additional subject shall be allowed
but subject to the outcome of Special Leave Petitions / Appeals filed by the Medical
Council of India.
6
Note: *“The proviso in italics has been a subject matter of challenge before the Hon’ble
High Court of Delhi, Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, and Hon’ble
High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur. The provisions of the regulations
disqualifying recognized Open School Board candidates and the candidates who have
studied Biology/Biotechnology as an Additional Subject has been struck down.”
4. ELIGIBILITY FOR MINORITY SEATS:
The Candidates who are eligible to claim Religious Minority seats which is a Notified
Minority Community as per section 2(c) of National Commission for Minorities Act,
1992 should produce the Study Certificate issued by the Head of the Institution last
studied as prescribed in the Annexure– III or a certificate issued by the competent
revenue authority of the candidate’s native jurisdiction as prescribed in the Annexure –
III-A. The Candidates submitting these Annexures in full form alone will be given
preference in Minority Colleges as per their Minority Status.
5. MINIMUM ELIGIBILITY MARKS FOR B.N.Y.S. COURSE IN RESPECT OF
ALL COMMUNITIES: -
Sl. Eligibility Marks (Aggregate of marks
Categories
No. in Science Subjects)
1. O.C. community 50 %
2. BC / BC (M) communities 45 %
3. MBC / DNC community 40 %
4. SC / SCA / ST communities 35 %
Physically Challenged Category
(Locomotor Disability of Lower
5. 40%
Limbs alone): OC, BC, BC (M),
MBC (DNC) communities*
Note:
a. In the case of candidates who have furnished the mark-sheets of the qualifying
examination, only in GRADES, the minimum marks of the grades alone will be
taken into consideration while determining the marks in the Science subjects of
Physics, Chemistry and Biology or Biotechnology or Botany and Zoology.
b. Candidates who have submitted marks sheets with GRADES and without
mentioning the range of marks for each grade should obtain the Marks Equivalent
Certificate from the examining authority and attach a certified copy along with
their mark sheet and upload in the respective column.
7
c. Normalization method will be adopted for calculating the minimum eligibility
mark for the candidates who have passed any other equivalent examination.
d. The candidates who are native of Tamil Nadu, the eligibility marks will be based
on their community as mentioned in the clause 5. (Nativity certificate should be
produced as per the ANNEXURE-II)
e. The candidates who are native of other States and have studied from VI Standard
to XII Standard in other State or native of other State and studied from VI
Standard to XII Standard continuously in Tamil Nadu will be considered under
the Open Category. Community Certificate obtained from other States will be
treated as Open Category.
6. INELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
The following categories of candidates are NOT ELIGIBLE to apply for B.N.Y.S. Course.
a. Candidates who have passed Higher Secondary Certificate Examination in
Vocational Stream, Pre-University Course in Tamil Nadu, and who used scribe,
who did not study English as a subject in Higher Secondary Examination.
b. If the candidates of other Universities / Boards (except State Board / CBSE /
ISCE) do not submit the Eligibility Certificate obtained from The Tamil Nadu
Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Guindy, Chennai, then their application will be
summarily rejected.
c. Candidates presently pursuing the B.N.Y.S. Course.
d. The selection and admission of candidates of other than those in Clause 3 will be
provisional subject to recognition of the qualifying examination by The Tamil
Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University under which the candidate gets admitted.
In case, the recognition is not accorded for the admission of the candidate on
any grounds, the provisional admission will not entitle the candidate for the
continuance of the course and the admission will be stands cancelled.
II PROCEDURE FOR FILLING AND SUBMISSION OF ONLINE APPLICATION
FORM:
1.The candidates are advised to take a print out of the Prospectus from the official
website and read it carefully, along with the parent / guardian before filling up the online
application form for the academic year 2025-2026.
The candidate should log in to the following website: -
www.tnayushselection.org
8
2.The application forms will be available online from 17-07-2025 onwards till
08.08.2025 upto 5:00 P.M.
a) Candidates have to fill all the mandatory columns in the online application. All
the relevant documents should be uploaded in PDF format. Candidates are
instructed to submit the online application after filling up all the required fields.
b) Request for change in any particulars after submitting the online application form
shall not be entertained under any circumstances.
c) Candidates are instructed to upload the following certificates while filling the
online application form and submit.
i. Class X Mark Sheet (both sides of Certificate).
ii. Class XI Mark Sheet (both sides of Certificate).
iii. Class XII (H.S.C.) Mark sheet (both sides of Mark Sheet) or any other
equivalent examination.
iv. Transfer certificate obtained after the completion of H.S.C / equivalent
examination or any other courses.
i. Community Certificate (only for the candidates who are native of
Tamil Nadu).
ii. Nativity certificate.
iii. Documents of Parent need to be uploaded for the candidate
who claim their native as Tamil Nadu for communal reservation:
 Community Certificate of either one of the parents obtained
from the competent Revenue Authority in Tamil Nadu
iv. Front Page of the Bank Pass Book or cancelled Cheque leaf of the Candidate/
Parents (for refund purpose).
v. Valid Income Certificate of parent for the candidates claiming fee exemption.
vi. Eligibility Certificate obtained from the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University, Guindy, Chennai for the candidate of other Universities / Boards
(except State Board, CBSE, ISCE)
vii. Court orders (if any).
viii. Additional supporting documents (if any).
Note: After submitting the filled in online application, the candidates are advised to
download their filled in online application form for future reference.
9
b) All the entries in the online application form should be filled by the candidate
carefully. The candidate should ensure that all information including the marks in
the qualifying examination furnished by the candidate in the application and the
enclosures are true and correct. The candidate is informed that after proper scrutiny
of the application, if the marks furnished by the candidate in the application are not
correct or any other information is found to be incorrect, then;
i. Candidates will forfeit the admission, no matter at what stage of the
course, at that time;
ii. Candidates will be debarred from pursuing any other course for a period
of three years;
iii. Legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated against the candidate
along with their parents/guardian for furnishing false Mark Sheet / false
Community Certificate / false Nativity Certificate.
c) Even if the candidate is provisionally selected for the BNYS admission but found to
have failed in +1 examination at later date, the provisional admission of the
candidate automatically stands cancelled.
d) Instructions for filling the Online Application Form:
I. The candidate and the parent / guardian must ensure candidates eligibility
criteria before submitting the online application form. The candidates are
instructed to go through the Prospectus carefully and be clear about all the
instructions with regard to the submission of the online application form.
II. The application form other than the one filled in online mode will not be
accepted, under any circumstances.
e) Candidate should login to the following website to access application form for
BNYS Courses 2025-2026 session www.tnayushselection.org
Candidate should fill the following particulars in the online application form:
1. Aadhar Number of the candidate
2. Name of the candidate
3. Name of the Parent / Guardian
4. Permanent Address / Address for communication
5. Mobile No.
6. E-mail ID
7. Gender
10
8. Date of Birth
9. Community and Caste details
10. Religion
11. Mother tongue
12. Nationality
13. Nativity
14. Qualifying Examination, Name of School
Education Board, Group code, Number of
Attempts in HSC, Year of passing Class VI to XII/
Equivalent and Undergoing / completed any
professional courses.
15. Medium of instruction
16. Marks details
17. State / District of Class VI to XII / Equivalent
18. Parent Occupation
19. Annual income of the parent
20. Civic details
21. Native district
22. Eligibility Certificate (If applicable)
23. Uploading documents
I. Passport size photograph of 35mm x 45mm and 50 to 100Kb in JPEG format (not
taken three months prior to submission of application) must be uploaded in the
online application form. It should be submitted at the time of admission at the
allotted Yoga and Naturopathy Medical College.
II. The candidates should upload their signature (25mm x 60mm and 10 to 40Kb in
JPEG format) in running hand writing in the online application form. Placing
initials as signature is not acceptable. Writing full name in capital letters would
also not be accepted as signature and the application form would be rejected.
III. The candidates must ensure that photograph and signature are uploaded in the
respective fields.
Note:
1. Candidates are instructed to submit only one application form.
2. Candidates should ensure that all information entered in the online application are
correct at the time of online submission of application form.
11
3. Incomplete applications and applications not in accordance with instruction will not
be considered and are liable to be rejected. The application fee once paid will not be
refunded.
4. Submission of online application and remittance of fee would close as per the
schedule given and no request for extension of time shall be entertained.
Application once submitted cannot be withdrawn.
III
METHOD OF FEE PAYMENT
i. Mode of payment through Debit Card / Credit card / Net banking / UPI Necessary
facilities have been provided for making payment through payment portal.
ii. Candidates must note that mere deduction of fee from the Bank account is not a proof
of fee payment.
iii. Check the validity of the Debit card / Credit card and keep everything ready while
logging on to the website for submitting application form. Candidate should enter the
information asked for and make payment through the portal.
iv. The advance tuition fee will be refunded to the candidate who has been allotted a seat
and not joined in 1st and 2nd round of counseling, only to the account whose details
are provided along with the online application form.
v. The advance Tuition Fees paid to the Selection Committee will be adjusted towards
the Tuition fee that has to be paid to the College.
vi. After the conduct of Registration Sub-Committee meeting by The Tamil Nadu Dr.
M G R Medical University to get adjusted against the Tuition Fees to be paid by the
candidates whose names are registered by the University.
vii. The Candidates who discontinue the course after joining, at any stage within the cut-
off date will forfeit all the fees including the Advance Tuition fee paid by him/her.
viii. All payments including the Advance Tuition fee will be forfeited if a candidate
who has been allotted a seat in the Round 3 or subsequent Rounds and does not join
the respective institution. Also, the Advance Tuition fee will be forfeited if the
admission gets cancelled due to any reason. E.g. in case, the candidate gives wrong
information at the time of registration and on the basis of which a seat may be
allotted and later cancelled by the Admission Authorities or at the time of reporting
the candidate fails to produce the required documents (within stipulated time).
12
IV. LIST OF SEATS:
The tentative lists of self-financing minority and non-minority Yoga and Naturopathy
Medical Colleges are furnished with the details of tentative seats available under
Management Quota in the Annexure– I.
Government Surrendered Seats and Management quota seats of the Self-Financing Yoga
and Naturopathy Colleges are allocated as follows:
Nature of the Government Management Quota
Institution Surrendered Seats Seats
Non-Minority Self-
65% 35%
Financing Institution
Minority Self-Financing
50% 50%
Institution
V. DETERMINATIONS OF RANK OF THE CANDIDATES:
a. Ranking will be made by merit on the basis of marks obtained by the eligible candidates
in the prescribed Science subjects in the qualifying examinations reduced to the base of
200 marks. The marks obtained through different Boards of Examination will be taken
into account after normalization of marks.
CALCULATION
Weighted Total Marks for a maximum of : 200
Percentage in Physics and Chemistry-taken together : (X)
(after normalization)
Percentage in Biology (after normalization) : (Y)
Percentage in Botany and Zoology-taken together : (Z)
(after normalization)
Weighted total marks for a maximum of 200 is : Either (X+Y) OR
(X+Z)
The percentage and weighted total should be accurate to two decimals.
b. Normalization of Marks:
i.) The marks obtained by the students in the relevant subjects in the qualifying
examination conducted by various Boards or Authority will be equated with the marks
obtained by the students in the same subjects in the qualifying examination conducted by
the State Board of Tamil Nadu by adopting the method of normalization.
13
Explanation: - Under the method of normalization, the highest mark obtained by the
students of various Boards in each subject will be equated to the highest mark obtained by
the students of State Board in that subject and the relative marks obtained by other
students in that subject will be determined accordingly.
Illustration: - If the highest mark secured by the student of State Board in Physics is 100,
and the highest mark secured by the student of any other Board in the same subject is 90,
both the highest mark will be considered to be equal to 100. If the student of the Other
Board secures 60 marks in Physics when the highest mark in Physics in the same board is
90, the 60 marks will be considered to be equal to 66.66 marks as arrived at below: -
100 x 60/90 = 66.66%
ii) After normalization of marks in the relevant subjects in the qualifying examination
conducted by different Boards, the qualified students of different Boards will be merged
into a common merit list.
c. Determination of Rank of Candidates Obtaining Equal Marks (Inter Se Merit):
In cases, where two or more candidates obtain equal aggregated marks for 200, the rank
of such candidates shall be determined on the basis of the following order: -
(i) Percentage in Biology or Botany and Zoology taken together in qualifying
examination.
(ii) Percentage in Chemistry in qualifying examination.
(iii) Percentage in fourth optional subject in qualifying examination.
(iv) Date of Birth- Weightage given to seniority in age
(v) Computerized Random number assigned. Higher value of Random Number will be
taken into Consideration.
d. The provisional rank list will be published by the Selection Committee on the official
websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in & www.tnayushselection.org.
VI.1.
COUNSELLING:
a. The selection will be made by counselling based on the provisional rank list only.
b. Selection Committee is the designated authority that conducts online counselling
for admissions to BNYS course in all Government and Self-Financing Yoga and
Naturopathy Medical Colleges in Tamil Nadu.
c. No authority or Institution shall admit any candidate to the undergraduate course
in contravention of the criteria or procedure as laid down by the Selection
14
Committee in respect of admissions and any candidate admitted in contravention
of the said criteria or procedure shall be discharged.
d. All Communication regarding Counselling and any change or modification and
relevant information pertaining to the admission process will be displayed in
the websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in & www.tnayushselection.org.
e. The candidates are instructed to visit the website at least two times a day for
updates from the date of issue of application till the end of admission process
without fail. Selection Committee will not be responsible for consequences
resulting due to non-diligent follow-up of notices, notification and publications
appearing on the website regarding admission to B.N.Y.S. Course 2025-2026
Session.
f. Candidates should attend the counselling rounds as per the schedule mentioned
in official website: www.tnayushselection.org.
g. All selections and admissions to B.N.Y.S course are only provisional. The
selection and admission are liable to be cancelled at any time as and when the
eligibility conditions are found to be defective or incorrect or of any suppression
of facts deliberately or otherwise. The right of allotment to B.N.Y.S Course and
College is vested totally with the Selection Committee.
VI.2. ROUNDS OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
There are four Rounds of counselling
I. Round 1
II. Round 2
III. Round 3
IV. Stray Round
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR COUNSELLING:
a) At the time of registration of counselling, all the candidates must pay anon-
refundable processing fee of Rs. 1000/ for management seats in Self Financing
Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges.
b) At the time of choice filling candidate should pay a refundable advance tuition fee
of Rs. 10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand only) for Management Quota Seats in
Self-Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges.
Note: This advance tuition fee will not be refunded after allotment of seats in
third round of the counselling.
15
c) This Advance Tuition fee is exempted for the Candidates belongs to
“SC/SCA/ST/BC (Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Caste) of native of
Tamil Nadu Candidates, if the annual income is less than 2.5 Lakhs.”
d) Candidates are instructed to register and Choice lock the seats for each Round of
counselling within the stipulated date and time as mentioned in the counselling
Schedule.
1. Candidates should be careful while choice filling and it is advisable to choose
preferred Colleges only.
2. Candidate could edit their Choice(s) before lock them. Once the candidate
locks their choice(s) during the online counselling, it cannot be changed later.
3. Admission to BNYS course shall be made by online counselling on the basis
of rank by applying the rule of reservation based on the preference of Choices
given by the candidate.
4. Candidates are advised not to share Login ID, Password and OTP with others.
5. Mutual transfer/Individual request for transfer of College will NOT be
permitted under any circumstances.
6. All Candidates [except those belongs to SC/SCA/ST/BC (Converts to
Christianity from Scheduled Caste) of Native of Tamil Nadu Candidates, if
the annual income is less than 2.5 Lakhs] provisionally selected for
Management Quota Seats in Self Financing Yoga and Naturopathy Medical
Colleges can download the provisional allotment order by paying the
additional advance fee of Rs. 15,000/- (Rupees Fifteen Thousand only). The
balance tuition fee should be paid to the College at the time of admission in
the College (Refer Clause VII for the fee details)
ROUND 1 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
a) The candidates should pay a non-refundable amount of Rs.1000/- (Rupees One
Thousand only) towards Registration Fee and advance tuition fee of Rs.10,000/-
(Rupees Ten Thousand only) for Management Quota Seats in Self Financing
Yoga and Naturopathy Medical Colleges during choice filling via online Bank
payment portal.
b) Candidates who are allotted a seat in Round 1 of the online counselling should
download their provisional allotment order and join the course in the respective
Colleges on or before the stipulated date and time.
16
c) A candidate who has taken a seat and not joined/ resigned the course within the
stipulated time will be eligible to attend the subsequent Rounds of online
counselling for the academic year 2025-2026.
d) Re-allotment is permitted during the Round 2 and Round 3 of counselling based
on rank.
ROUND 2 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
a. Candidates who had registered for Round-1 and did not get any seat allotted are not
required to register again. Also, candidates who have not reported in Round-1 need
not register again. Candidate who has joined the seats and wish to opt for
upgradation need not register again.
b. Candidate who wishes to retain their seats (who don’t want a change in College)
need not participate in Round 2.
c. Fresh choice filling is permitted in Round 2 only for candidates who did not choice
lock in Round 1.
d. If upgraded in Round 2, the candidate has to relinquish the seat from Round 1 and
join Round 2 allotted seat.
e. Round 2 choice filling will follow the registration and candidates who wish for
upgradation, un allotted candidates and not joined candidates have to fill their
choices.
f. If the candidate is reallotted in Round 2, then the BNYS seat allotted to candidates
during Round 1 of Counselling will be allotted to other candidates in descending
order, not in ascending order.
g. If the candidate has Not-Joined or discontinued the course before the stipulated
resignation date, the candidate will be eligible to attend the subsequent rounds of
online counselling (without forfeiture of fees) for the academic year 2025-2026.
h. If the candidate has joined but discontinued the course after the stipulated date of
resignation, he/she will be eligible to attend the Round-3 of online counselling for
the academic year 2025-2026, but they have to forfeit the registration fee, advance
tuition fee, and tuition fee paid by him/her, in addition he/she should pay
discontinuation fees of Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh only).
i. Candidates getting upgraded in Round 2 shall NOT have any claim on Round 1
seat
17
Virtual vacancies:
 If a candidate allotted a seat in Round 1 opts for upgradation in Round 2, that
Round 1 seat will be displayed as a virtual vacancy.
 All candidates will be allowed to fill choices for virtual vacancies during Round 2
choice filling.
 However, such seats will be converted to real vacancies and allotted in Round 2
only if the candidate from Round 1 vacates or upgrades the seat.
ROUND - 3 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
After completion of Round 2 of Online counselling, the remaining vacancies will be
filled up with the candidates from the existing Provisional Merit list by Round 3 Online
counselling. When a candidate is scheduled to attend the Round-3 online counselling,
then the candidate has to pay the Registration Fee of Rs. 1000/-(non-refundable) via
online Bank payment portal. The candidates who have already paid the registration
during previous Rounds of counselling need not pay again if they have not been allotted
seats.
ELIGIBLE CANDIDATES FOR ROUND-3:
a. Candidates who have registered for Round-1 or Round-2 and did not get any seat
allotted are not required to register again.
b. Fresh choice filling is allowed for the candidates who are already in the
Provisional Merit list who have not choice filled in Round 1 or Round 2.
c. If upgraded in Round 1 to Round 2, the candidate must get relieved from
Round-1 or Round-2 seat and join Round-3 seat.
d. Once the candidate joins the Round 3 seat, candidates cannot upgrade or resign
from this seat.
e. If any candidate does not join the Round 3 allotted seat, candidate will have to
forfeit the Registration fee, and advance tuition fee paid by him/her. And they will
also be not eligible to participate in the subsequent rounds of counselling.
Hence the candidates are advised to exercise due diligence in their options and do not fill
unwanted options in which they do not wish to pursue studies.
18
STRAY ROUND OF COUNSELLING:
a. Stray vacancies if arises after the third round of Counselling, stray vacancy
counselling will be conducted by the Selection Committee as per the directions of
the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy.
b. The candidates should pay an advance Tuition fee of Rs.50,000/ (Rupees Fifty
Thousand only) for BNYS Course to participate in the stray round or subsequent
round if any via online bank payment portal which is not refundable incase the
candidate after allotment does not join the course. This arrangement is done to
avoid precious BNYS Course remaining vacant at the end of multiple rounds of
counselling.
c. Candidates who are not holding any seats in BNYS course will be eligible to
participate in this Counselling.
d. Candidates who have joined in the BNYS College will not be eligible to
participate in this counselling.
e. If the seat is allocated in the stray vacancy, the candidate has to download the
allotment order and join in the College within the stipulated date and time as
mentioned in the order. To download the allotment order, the candidate should
pay an additional tuition fee of Rs. 15, 000/- (Rupees Fifteen Thousand only). In
case, if the candidates fail to download the allotment order or fails to join the
College (after downloaded the allotment order) within the stipulated date and
time, his/her advance tuition fee will be forfeit and he/she will not be able to
participate in Tamil Nadu BNYS Counselling for subsequent one academic year.
In case, if the candidate joined in the College and discontinued the course, his/her
advance tuition fee and tuition fee will be forfeited, in addition he/she have to pay
a discontinuation fee of RS. 1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Only), and he/she will
not be able to participate in Tamil Nadu BNYS Counselling for subsequent one
academic year.
f. Allotted candidates during Stray vacancy Round, if they fail to join, they will
have to forfeit the Advance tuition fees. They also will not be able to participate
in Tamil Nadu BNYS Counselling for subsequent one academic year.
g. If it is found that a candidate is/was involved in impersonation / suppression or
misrepresentation of facts and production of falsified / bogus certificates, his/her
provisional allotment order will be cancelled and legal proceedings / criminal
action will be initiated.
19
h. BNYS Seat matrix for Management Quota Seats in Self Financing Yoga and
Naturopathy Medical Colleges will be released in the website before counselling
and any addition of Colleges / Seats will be displayed at the time of counselling.
VI.3. Those who get Re-totaled / Revalued marks during the first appearance can also
register and choice lock on subsequent rounds of counselling. If the candidate produces
the Re-totaled / Revalued marks after the counselling and within the cutoff date then
his/her name, will be considered only in the existing vacancies available and he/she
cannot claim any preferential rights for allotment according to merit under re-totaled /
revalued marks. Candidates, who submit the Revalued / Re-totaled marks after the
administrative cut-off dates fixed by the Ministry of AYUSH, New Delhi / The Tamil
Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai, will not be considered for selection.
VI.4. Counselling / Allotment for the seats newly created due to provision of seat matrix
after the commencement of first round counselling by The Tamil Nadu Dr. MGR
Medical University or due to the orders / interim orders passed / issued by the Honorable
High Court after the commencement of 1st round counselling will be done during the
2nd round of counselling but within the cutoff date as laid down by the Affiliating
Body, The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University / Govt. of Tamil Nadu.
Note:
1. Candidates who fail to fill the choice in any round within the stipulated time as
mentioned in the selection committee official website, for whatsoever reasons,
will be given a chance to fill their choice and lock them in the subsequent round
of the existing available vacancies only irrespective of their provisional rank.
2. Candidates getting allotment through court orders before the cutoff date will be
given a seat in the existing vacancies under Management quota available at the
time of counseling when he/she actually attends.
3. Those who do not join within the stipulated time to the particular College to
which they are allotted in any round, they will not be considered for join at any
point of time later under Management quota of the same round. However, they
can appear for the subsequent round (if applicable) as mentioned in the details of
the rounds of counselling.
4. If a candidate fails to fill choice and lock them in any round, then he/she will not be
eligible for the same round seats at any point of time later for whatsoever
reason.
20
5. Individual request for transfer of College will not be entertained after allotment of
seat is made.
6. Mutual transfers will not be entertained under any circumstances.
VII. FEE STRUCTURE FOR MANAGEMENT QUOTA SEATS:
a. Fee Structure for Self-Financing Colleges Rs.2,50,000/- (Per Annum) inclusive of
Tuition fee, Admission fee, Special fee, Laboratory / Computer / Internet fee, Library fee,
Sports fee, Maintenance and Amenities fee, extracurricular activities fee and other
recurring expenditure, as fixed by the Committee on Fixation of fee in respect of Self-
Financing Professional Colleges from time to time.
b. Detailed information regarding Special Fees, Caution Deposit, Hostel Fees, if availed,
University Registration Fees, Examination Fees, etc. can be obtained from the Head of
the Institution in which the candidate joins.
c. The Native of Tamil Nadu candidate of SC/SCA/ST and Converted Christian (i.e.,
Converted Christian from Schedule Caste) community whose parental annual income is
less than Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two lakhs Fifty Thousand only) are exempted from
payment of only the advance Tuition Fees of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees Twenty Fifty Thousand
only) (As per G.O.Ms.No.06 Adi Dravidar and Tribal Welfare Department dated 09-01-
2012). Candidates should furnish supportive documents like Valid Income Certificate as
per the Annexure-VII and Community Certificate obtained from the competent authority
along with the application.
VIII. NOTE:
1. The selection and admission of candidates of other Universities / Boards will be
provisional subject to recognition of the qualifying examination by The Tamil Nadu Dr.
M.G.R. Medical University under which the candidate gets admitted. In case, the
recognition is not accorded for the admission of the candidate on any ground, the
provisional admission will not entitle the candidate right for the continuance of the
course and the admission will stand cancelled.
2. The Selected Candidates should produce all the original documents at the time of
admission to the Principal of the Medical College concerned. Selection / Allotment will
stand cancelled if the candidates could not produce the original documents at the time of
admission.
3. Selected candidates should produce a physical fitness certificate obtained from a
Registered Medical Practitioner not below the rank of Assistant Surgeon or “A” Class
21
practitioner Registered with Tamil Nadu Board of Indian Medicine or Tamil Nadu
Siddha Medical Council or Tamil Nadu Homoeopathy Medical Council, Chennai at the
time of joining the course.
4. Candidates selected for admission and his / her parent / guardian will have to sign
discipline declaration form in Annexure – IV and failure to sign the declaration will result
in the cancellation of selection.
5. Candidates selected for admission to BNYS Course are not guaranteed any
appointment in Government Service.
6. Hepatitis-B vaccination:
All candidates selected for admission to first year BNYS course should take the
Hepatitis-B Vaccine before admission to the Course and only on producing a certificate
in Annexure – V, the Principals will admit the candidates. The students should take
further doses at the prescribed intervals as required.
7. Enquiry or any correspondence regarding the selection of candidates will not be
entertained.
8. The Candidates who join BNYS Course should not indulge or participate in any kind
of ragging. If they are found to have indulged in ragging in past or noticed later, the
candidates will be removed from roll of institution at whatever stage of study and
criminal action will be taken against candidates.
9. If proof of Authenticity of Certificate could not be obtained by the Institution on time,
the candidate will not be allowed to continue the 2nd year of study.
10. The Government orders issued and to be issued from time to time pertaining to any
of the matters contained in the prospectus should be read as part and parcel of this
prospectus and such terms and conditions in the Government order are deemed to have
been incorporated in this prospectus.
11. No admission, re-allotment / transfer shall be made after cut-off date /Extended Cut-off
Date for the academic year as per the guidelines issued by the Ministry of AYUSH,
New Delhi / The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University.
IX DISCONTINUATION FEES:
i) Candidates selected for admission and his/her parent /guardian will have to execute an
Agreement Bond as prescribed in Annexure–VI. Failure to execute the Agreement Bond will
lead to cancellation of selection.
22
ii) Candidates who discontinue the course on or after the last cut off date for admission
process for the academic session 2025 - 2026 and on any date of the subsequent year are
bound by the bond and thereby they shall have to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees
One lakh only) as penalty for having breached the contract in the bond by means of
Demand Draft drawn in favour of “The Director of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy, Chennai-106” payable at Chennai.
Note: This penalty is only for candidates who discontinue the course and not for those
Candidates who seek re-allotment and movement from one to another College.
23
CHECK LIST FOR BNYS COURSE ADMISSION 2025-2026 SESSION
CASE- I : CANDIDATE’S WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU AND
STUDIED SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII- STD IN TAMIL NADU.
CASE- II : CANDIDATE’S WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU BUT
STUDIED SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII- STD PARTLY/ FULLY IN
OUTSIDE TAMIL NADU.
CASE- III : CANDIDATE’S WHO ARE NON- NATIVE OF TAMIL
NADU AND STUDIED SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII-STD
CONTINUOUSLY IN TAMIL NADU.
CERTIFICATES/ DOCUMENTS CASE- I CASE- II CASE- III
DOCUMENTS OF CANDIDATE’S ARE AS FOLLOWS:
X-Mark Sheet   
XI and XII –Mark Sheets   
Transfer Certificate   
Nativity Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil Nadu  
Community Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil  
Nadu (except- OC)
Certificate for Proof of Study from VI Std. to XII Std. in Tamil  
Nadu (From the Head of schools where studied)
Birth Certificate   
Eligibility Certificate obtained from the Tamil Nadu Dr.   
M.G.R. Medical University, Guindy, Chennai for the candidates
of other Universities / Boards (except TN State
Board, CBSE, and ISCE Boards)
Candidate’s Aadhar card   
DOCUMENTS OF PARENTS ARE AS FOLLOWS:
Parent Community Certificate from Competent Authority of  
Tamil Nadu (Except- OC)
Income Certificate of parent for the candidates claiming fee  
exemption
24
ROUND FREE RESIGNATION EXIT WITH ELIGIBILITY DISCONTINUATIO
EXIT FORFEITUR FOR N FEES AFTER
E OF FEES FURTHER JOINING
COUNSELLIN
G
Round 1 Allowed Allowed Allowed to Eligible for NIL
exit further
counselling
Round 2 Allowed Allowed only Allowed to Eligible for If the candidates
once within exit within further resign before the
stipulated time stipulated counselling stipulated date in
time without Round 2 the
forfeiture candidates will be
allowed free exit.
After the stipulated
date in round 2,
discontinuation fees
will be Rs.1 lakh and
forfeit Advance tuition
fees and tuition fees.
Round 3 Not Not allowed If not joined, Not allowed in After joining the
allowed forfeit next round allotted seat of round
Advance 3, discontinuation fees
tuition fees will be Rs.1 lakh and
and Tuition forfeiture of
fee. Advance tuition fees
and tuition fees will
also apply.
Round Not Not allowed If not Not eligible for After joining the
4 (Stray allowed joined next one year. allotted seat of Stray
round) forfeit round, discontinuation
Advance fees will be Rs.1 lakh
tuition fees and forfeiture of
& Tuition Advance tuition fees
fee and not and tuition fees will
eligible for also apply
next one
year.
25
ROUND CANDIDATE FORFEITURE OF FEES ELIGIBILITY
Round 1 If allotted and No forfeiture of fees Can participate in round 2 for
joined re-allotment
If allotted and not No forfeiture of fees Can participate in subsequent
joined/Resigned rounds of counseling
If not allotted/not Can participate in subsequent
choice locked rounds of counseling
Round 2 No forfeiture of fees. Allowed to Allowed for further rounds of
If allotted and vacate seat once before the stipulated
counseling
joined date.
If allotted / No forfeiture of fees Allowed for further rounds of
Re-allotted and counseling
not joined
If not choice
No forfeiture of fees Eligible for round 3
locked
If wants to Forfeiture of advance tuition fee, tuition Not eligible for round 3
discontinue after fee, and pay discontinuation fee
the stipulated date
and time
If not allotted Eligible for round 3
Round 3 If allotted and Not allowed to vacate seat. Not allowed for further rounds
If wants to discontinue, then forfeit
Joined of counseling
Advance tuition fees, tuition fee and
pay discontinuation fee
If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for stray round
Not joined
If not allotted Eligible for stray vacancy
If not choice
Eligible for stray vacancy
locked
Stray Not allowed to vacate seat.
If allotted and
If wants to discontinue, then forfeit
vacanc
Joined Advance tuition fees, tuition fee and
Not eligible for next one year.
y
pay discontinuation fee
If allotted and Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for next one year.
26
Not joined
ANNEXURE I
LIST OF SELF-FINANCING YOGA AND NATUROPATHY MEDICAL COLLEGES
Out of the total sanctioned seats, 50% of the seats in the minority Self-Ffinancing
Colleges and 35% of the seats in the non-minority Self-financing Colleges will be
allocated to Management quota.
Sl. Annual Management
No Name of the Institution intake Quota seats
1 J.S.S. INSTITUTE OF NATUROPATHY AND YOGIC
SCIENCES,
PALAKKAD MAIN ROAD,
100 35
COIMBATORE- 641 105.
PHONES: 9047596555,9486622485, 0422-2656470
Email: jssinyscoimbatore@gmail.com
2 SIVARAJ NATUROPATHY & YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE, SIDDHAR KOILROAD,
THUMBATHULIPATTY, PERUMAMPATTY POST,
40 14
SALEM - 636 307.
PHONE: 7448883500, 0427-2481006, 2481007
Email: sivarajColleges@yahoo.com
3 SREE RAMAKRISHNA MEDICAL COLLEGE OF
NATUROPATHY AND YOGIC SCIENCES,
KULASEKARAM, KANNIYAKUMARI - 629 161, 100 35
PHONE:04651-278425,277065,
Email: srkmCollege@gmail.com.
4 EXCEL MEDICAL COLLEGE FOR NATUROPATHY
AND YOGA,
PALLAKAPALAYAM,
100 35
NAMMAKAL DISTRICT- 637 303.
PHONE: 9842713789, 04288-227361 TO 68
Email: principalbnys@excelColleges.com
5 NANDHA NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
TIRUVACHI VILLAGE, ERODE – 638 052, 60 21
PHONE: 04294-224611, 221405,
Email: nny@nandhainstitutions.org
6 ANNAI COLLEGE OF NATUROPATHY AND
YOGA SCIENCE,
KOVILACHERI, KUMBAKONAM,
TANJAVUR – 612 503. 100 50
PHONE: 9600087363, 9360395392, 9843228957.
Email : admission@annaiCollege.com,
admissionbnys@gmail.com.
7 KRISHNA NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE, 100 35
KOTTAIMEDU, IRUNGALUR, TRICHY – 621 105.
27
PHONE:8300373889, 0431-2616789.
Email : knaymc@gmail.com
8 MOTHER TERASA NATUROPATHY AND YOGA
MEDICAL COLLEGE,
METTUSALAI, ILLUPPUR,
100 35
PUDUKKOTTAI - 622 102.
PHONE:04339-272151, 9443372151.
Email : mtbnys2018@gmail.com
9 S THANGAPAZHAM MEDICAL COLLEGE OF
NATUROPATHY AND YOGIC SCIENCE RESEARCH
CENTRE,
100 35
VASUDEVANALLUR, ATHUVAZHI, TENKASI - 627 760.
PHONE : 8220912307, 9489805644, 04636-242460
Email : stmcnys@gmail.com
10 KONGU NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
THOPPUPALAYAM, PERUNDURAI - 638 060.
PHONE : 9952851503, 9489481489, 9944567375, 04294- 100 35
226750, 226744
Email : kongunymc@kongu.edu
11 SIR ISSAC NEWTON NATUROPATHY AND YOGA
MEDICAL COLLEGE,
PAPPAKOVIL, NAGAPATTINAM-611 102.
100 35
CELL : 7373765117, 9384314365, 9842450111, 9751330555.
Email : principalsininys@gmail.com
12 ATTHI NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
KAKATHOPPU, GUDIYATTAM, VELLORE DIST-635 806. 100 35
PHONE : 04171-228108, 8754959066.
Email : atthinaturopathymedicalCollege@gmail.com
13 SHRI INDRA GANESAN INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL
SCIENCE NATUROPATHY AND YOGA MEDICAL
COLLEGE,
MANIKANDAM, TRICHY-620 012. 100 35
PHONE: 8508688841, 7373333444.
Email : indraganesantrust@gmail.com,
director@indraganesaninstitutions.com
14 SONA MEDICAL COLLEGE OF NATUROPATHY AND
YOGA,
KANDARKULAMANICKAM, SALEM-637 504
100 35
CELL : 94427 00351, 94427 00353, 94427 00366.
Email : principal@sonamedicalCollege.ac.in
15 G.T.N. MEDICAL COLLEGE OF NATUROPATHY AND
YOGA,
100 35
GTN NAGAR, DINDIGUL-624 005
CELL : 7397793313, 9791877074, 9677973774
28
Email : gtnnaturopathy2021@gmail.com
16 SWAMY VIVEKANANDHA NATUROPATHY AND YOGA
MEDICAL COLLEGE, ,
VEERACHIPALAYAM, SANKARI TK,
SALEM DIST-637 303 100 35
PHONE : 04288-234670 (4 LINES), 9047705939, 9788854417.
Email : swamyvivekanandhabnys@gmail.com,
vivekaadmission@gmail.com.
17 IMMANUEL ARASAR YOGA AND NATUROPATHY
MEDICAL COLLEGE, NATTALAM, MARTHANDAM
100 35
KANYAKUMARI
PHONE: 9443606955
NOTE: Seat allotment will be made to the above Colleges subject to Approval, Affiliation
and Provision of Seat Matrices by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University.
Refer the categories of seats under Clause.No.7 in the prospectus.
29
ANNEXURE - II
CERTIFICATE OF NATIVITY IN TAMIL NADU
Certified that Thiru / Selvi / Tmt.
....................................................................................................... S/o. / D/o. / W/o.
........................................................... residing at .........................................
..................................................................................................................................................
........... an applicant for seeking admission to BNYS course in Government / Self-Financing
Colleges in Tamil Nadu is a Native of Tamil Nadu.
Signature:
Name & Designation:
Station:
Office Seal:
Date:
NOTE:
(1) This Certificate should be issued by an officer of the Revenue Department not below
the rank of Tahsildar in the Taluk concerned.
(2) This Certificate should not be issued by the Special Tahsildars.
(3) Any foreign national irrespective of the period of study in the State will not become
eligible to apply for this course. No certificate of Nativity in the State of Tamil Nadu,
should therefore be issued to Nationals of other countries for this purpose.
(4) The Certificate should bear the stamp of the office of the Officer signing the
Certificate. The Certifying Officers should insist upon clear proof of the Nativity of the
Parent or Guardian of the candidate and satisfy themselves on the genuineness of the
residential qualification. They should be particularly careful in the case of candidates
whose mother tongue is not Tamil and whose place of birth is other than Tamil Nadu
and who have studied VI th to XII STD outside Tamil Nadu.
(5) Residence Certificate will not be considered as Nativity Certificate.
(6) The guidelines prescribed for the issue of Nativity Certificate and they are as follow
as per Lr.
30
No. R.A.V(B) –16932/2000, dated 3.4.2000 of the Special Commissioner and
Commissioner of Revenue Administration, Chepauk, Chennai 5.
i. The parents/ guardians of the applicants / students or the applicant themselves
should have permanently resided continuously for a period of 5 years in Tamil
Nadu.
ii. Permanently residing for a period of 5 years should be supported by
documentary evidence.
iii. The family Ration Card, Electoral Roll, census list if taken recently,
documents like sale deed, tax receipt etc. relating to the property owned by
either of the parents or by the applicant may be verified.
iv. The Transfer Certificate issued by the school authorities where the applicant had
studied last may be verified to know whether he/she was in the State for 5 years.
v. Enquiry in the village/ place of residence of the neighbour by Village
Administrative Officers regarding continuous residing.
vi To ensure that wrong or incorrect address had not been furnished to obtain the
certificate.
vii The birth place of the parent, place of the residence of the parent / father,
permanent assets, mother tongue, place of education, place of marriage of the
applicant / parents, the period of stay in and outside Tamil Nadu can also be
considered before issuing certificate.
31
Annexure-III
RELIGIOUS MINORITY CERTIFICATE
(Candidates who claim seats in Colleges of Religious Minority Status)
(This certificate is issued for the purpose of seeking admission to Under Graduate Medical
Courses for the academic year 2025-2026).
This is to certify that Thiru / Selvi
.…………………………………………………………………….. S/o / D/o
……………………………………………………………………. has studied from
………………… Standard to …………… Standard from ……………. to ………………
in our Institution located at ………………………………… He /She belongs to
……………………… religion as per the Admission Register maintained in the
Institution.
Therefore, he/she belongs to------------------------------------ Religious Minority.
Signature of the Principal of the
school with seal, where the
candidate has last studied:
Name of the Principal:
Name, full postal address and
telephone number of the school,
where the candidate has last
studied:
Date:…………………………………………
32
Annexure –III-A
PROFORMA FOR RELIGIOUS MINORITY CERTIFICATE
(To be issued by the competent Revenue authority of the candidate’s native
jurisdiction)
(This certificate is used for the purpose of seeking admission to Under Graduate Medical
courses for the academic year 2025 - 2026).
***
**
This is to certify that Thiru / Selvi
…………………………………………………… S/o D/o
…………………………………… Has studied from …………………… standard to
………………………. Standard from …………………… to ……………. In
……………………………… Institution located at ………………………………………
He/She belongs to …………………………………………………. religion.
Signature: ……………………………………
Name and Designation: ……………………….
(with office seal)
Place: ………………….. Taluk:
Date: ………………….. District:
33
Annexure- IV
Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent/Guardian
(This should not be enclosed with the application but should
be submitted only at the time of admission)
I / WE do hereby solemnly and sincerely affirm
1. That the statements made and information furnished in the application submitted and also in all
the enclosures there to submit by him/her are true. Should it however be found that any
information furnished there in is untrue in material particulars, I / We realize that he / she is
liable for criminal prosecution and forfeiture of his / her seat in the Institution allotted during the
counselling.
2. That my son/daughter/ward would conform strictly to all the rules and regulations prescribed by
The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai in force now or which may be
introduced in the Institution hereafter and that I/We realize that breach of discipline and rules on
my son’s / daughter’s / ward’s part would entail forfeiture of his/her seat in the Institution.
3. That my son/daughter/ward shall not make any claim for admission to a particular College as a
matter of right during allotment/Re-allotment.
4. That my son/daughter/ward agrees to pay any amount that may be become due as and when the
fee structure is revised as may be decided by Government of Tamil Nadu / Committee appointed
by the Government for the purpose.
5. That my son / daughter / ward do hereby agree to conform to follow the rules and regulations
including those relating to the hostel laid down or to be laid down by the Dean of the Institution
for due maintenance of discipline at the said College and assure that he / she will not join my
agitation / strike of any kind during course of study and further agree to make good when called
upon to do so to the Government of Tamil Nadu any damage to furniture, apparatus or other
articles which may be caused by any carelessness negligence and want only on his / her part.
6. That my son / daughter / ward who is a Native of Tamil Nadu and will not claim dual Nativity
in future.
7. That my son / daughter / ward hereby declares that he / she belongs to ……………. Community
(Sub caste ………………….. ) and is fully aware the producing a false Community Certificate
leads to expulsion from any course of study at any time besides initiation of criminal action
against him/her as per law.
34
8. That we are fully aware, as per the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and Tamil
Nadu Prohibition of Ragging Act,1997, Ragging is an offence, and is banned in the Institution
and anyone indulging in ragging is liable to be punished by expulsion from the Institution and /
or rigorous imprisonment up to 3 years, and /or fine up to Rs.25,000/-
Place:
Date: Signature of Candidate Signature of the Parent/Guardian.
35
ANNEXURE - V
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE FOR ADMINISTRATION OF HEPATITIS-B VACCINATION
I, Dr ................................................................. Registration No. .............................. certify
that I have this day .................................... of ............................. 2025 administered the Hepatitis-B
Vaccine to the candidate whose particulars are given below:
1. Name of the Candidate
2. Father’s Name
3. Sex
4. Age
5. Identification marks: I.
II.
6. DOSE I / II / III
Signature of the Applicant Signature of Medical Officer
Place : Name and Designation
Date : Officer Seal
36
ANNEXURE - VI
AGREEMENT BOND FORM FOR CANDIDATES ADMITTED FOR B.N.Y.S. COURSE
FOR 2025 - 2026 ACADEMIC YEAR
This agreement made on this ..................... day of ……………………. month of 2025
between/with Governor of Tamil Nadu (hereinafter called the Governor which expression shall,
where the context so admits include his successor in office) of one part and
.................................... son/daughter of ..........................................resident of………………. in
the....................................... Taluk of…………………………………. District (hereinafter called the
candidates) which expression shall, where the context so admits include his/her heirs, executors,
administrators and representatives of the other part.
WHEREAS the candidate has, on his/her application been selected to undergo training for the
B.N.Y.S. course in the Government / Self Financing Medical College (hereinafter referred to as the
said College).
AND WHEREAS the candidate has agreed to complete his / her training for the said course, at the
said College subject to the conditions hereinafter appearing.
Now THEREFORE, this agreement witnesses and it is hereby agreed as follows:
1. The Candidate shall diligently complete his/her training for the said course at the said College,
shall abide by the rules of the said Colleges for the time being in force regulating the conduct of
students at the said College and shall pass all the examinations prescribed for the said course
by the University or the Medical Institution concerned.
2. Upon passing the final B.N.Y.S. Examination the candidate shall serve as “Intern” for the
prescribed period as laid down by The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai.
3. (i) The candidate shall on demand made by the Government within two years from the date
on which he/she registers himself/herself as a Medical Practitioner, serve for a period of not
less than five years and in such rural areas as the Government may by general or special orders
specify.
(ii) Those candidates who fail to comply with clause 3 (i) shall have to pay a sum of
Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees Three Lakhs only) or as the Government may direct as penalty for
having breached the contract in the bond.
4. During the period of Internship under clause (2) and while in service under clause (3) the
candidate shall faithfully, diligently and with skill and ability perform his/her duties and observe
the rules for the time being in force made by the Governor or the President as the case may be
for regulating the conduct of Government Servants.
37
5. While in service under clause (3) the Pay and allowance and other conditions of service of
the candidate shall be regulated by the rules and orders of the Government for the time being
inforce, for the posts to which he/she is appointed.
6. Candidates who discontinue the course on or after the last cut off date for admission process
for the academic session 2025-2026 and on any date of the subsequent year are bound by
the bond and thereby, they shall have to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only)
as penalty for having breached the contract in the bond by means of Demand Draft drawn
in favour of “The Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai-106” payable
at Chennai.
Note:
This penalty is only for candidates who discontinue the course and not for re-allotment and movement
from one to another College.
7. Any sum falling due from the candidate under this agreement shall be recovered from him/her
as an arrear of land revenue.
8. If any dispute shall arise between the parties here to in respect of this agreement or any of
the provisions herein contained or anything arising here unto except in respect of matters on
which the decisions of the Government under clause (6) is declared to be final and binding, the
same shall be referred to the arbitration of Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
whose decision thereon shall be final and binding on the parties.
9. The witness shall bear the stamp duty payable in respect of this agreement if required. In
witness where of the parties here to have appended their signature here unto on the dates
respectively mentioned against the signature.
Signature of the Candidate and Date
Witnesses:
1.
2.
Signature of the
Parent/Guardian and
full address
38
To
The Governor of Tamil Nadu
Whereas the Governor has, in order to secure due performance of the above agreement, demanded
security from the candidates.
Now, therefore, in consideration of the admission of the candidate to the said College and his/her
continuance there, for training as aforesaid and at the request of the candidate.
(i) Son /Daughter of .......................................................
Resident of ................................................................
Taluk of......................................................................
in the District of..........................................................
(ii) Son /Daughter of .......................................................
Resident of ................................................................
Taluk of......................................................................
in the district of..........................................................
(iii) Son /Daughter of .......................................................
Resident of ................................................................
Taluk of......................................................................
in the District of..........................................................
Herein after called ‘The Sureties’ on behalf of the candidate do hereby jointly and severally agree that
in the event of the candidate committing any breach of any term of the above agreement to which
breach the decision of the Government shall be final and binding on the sureties we shall pay to the
Government on demand and without the demur sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only) or as
the Government may direct and we hereby bind ourselves as representatives for such payment. We
further agree that any sum due hereunder shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.
We also agree that notwithstanding the provisions of sections 133 and 135 of the Indian Contract
Act, 1872 (Central Act IX of 1872) or any other rule of law or equity in that behalf any indulgence
of forbearance shown by the Government to the candidate or any variance in the terms of the
contract with the candidate whether with or without the consent of the sureties or either of this shall
not operate as a discharge of the sureties’ obligation under this bond.
Signed by us this .......................................... day of..........................
2025Witness:
1.
2.
39
1. Signature of First Surety / Parent or
Guardian of Candidate Full address
.........................................................................
.........................................................................
.........................................................................
2. Signature of Second Surety and Full Address
.........................................................................
.........................................................................
.........................................................................
3. Signature of Third Surety and Full Address
.........................................................................
.........................................................................
.........................................................................
40
ANNEXURE -VII
INC OME CERTIFICATE
(This Certificate should be issued by an Officer of Revenue Department not below the rank of
Tahsildar in the Taluk concerned.)
Name of the Applicant…………………………………... Application No……………. This is to
certify that Annual income of Thiru / Thirumathi …………………………………………………
(Parent Name) Parent/Guardian* of Thiru /
Thirumathi……………………………………….……………………………. ……………...
an applicant for (Applicant Name) Admission to BNYS course in Government / Self-financing
Colleges in Tamil Nadu residing at ...................................................................................... is Rs
................... (Rupees…………………………………………………………...only).
Name and Signature:
Designation:
Office Seal:
Date: Station:
Note:
*Applicable only when both parents are deceased
1. This Certificate should not be issued by Special Tahsildars. Deputy Tahsildars such as Loans,
Land acquisition. Election, Excise and HQs. Deputy Tahsildars, Special Deputy Collectors,
Asst. Commissioner of Agricultural income, Excise and Elections etc.,
2. Candidates of SC/SCA/ST whose parents’ annual income is less than Rs.2.5 lakhs and
claiming the fee concession for admission to Government Medical College and Government
Quota in Self Financing Medical Colleges should produce the above Income Certificate (As
per G.O.(Ms) No.51 AD and TW Department, dated 07-08-2013) in Original at the time of
Counseling Compulsorily.
41
ANNEXURE-VIII
FAQ’S REGARDING COUNSELLING PROCESS
Q.No.1: How to apply for BNYS UG Medical Degree Course admission in Tamil Nadu?
Ans: After the HSC 2025 results are out, there will be notification in the websites
www.tnayushselection.org, www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in for application to BNYS UG Medical
Degree Course admission in Tamil Nadu. Candidates are advised to Register them to create
User Name and Password after that login using their User Name and Password. Candidates are
advised to read this prospectus carefully and apply through the website in Online mode only.
Q.No. 2: I have applied online. Is this enough for getting a seat?
Ans: No. Applying online is just the first stage in the entire process. Once all the applications are
received and scrutinized Eligible Merit List of Candidates (Candidates who have applied and
are found eligible) will be published in the websites. After this Candidates have to register for
the counselling process as mentioned in the scheme of counselling.
Q. No. 3: How do I register for the counselling?
Ans.: After the Merit List is published candidates have to register before the onset of counselling by
paying the non-refundable online Processing Fee of Rs.1000/- in the website after logging in
using the same credentials (User Name, Password) used during the application process.
Registration is allowed before Round 1, Round 3 and Stray Round and Fresh registration is not
allowed before Round 2 (as this is a re-allottment Round)
Note: Counselling Registration is allowed only for already applied candidates who are in the
Eligible Merit list and not for those candidates who have not at all applied to BNYS UG
Medical Degree Course.
Q. No. 4: How and when I had to make the payment?
Ans: After completion of Choice filling, payment page appears automatically. Candidate can do
online payment by Net Banking / Credit card/ Debit card. Only after the successful payment,
candidate can submit their choice filling.
Q. No. 5: Is there any restriction for filling up number of choices of Institution (College) in choice
filling form?
Ans: No, you can give as many choices as you wish during online choice filling. However, choices
should be in order of your preference. There will be a common software for Management
Quota seats for filling up of choices. The choices will be available based on your eligibility
and application.
Q. No.6: Is it necessary to fill up the choices and lock the choices to get seat allotted? Or I will be
allotted seat automatically from leftover seats?
42
Ans: After online registration (registration is compulsory to take part in online allotment process,
before the counselling Rounds during specified registration period), you have to fill in choice
of Institution/College/course in order of your preference. Once choice is filled in, it can be
modified before locking it. If candidate does not lock the choice submitted by him/her, the
choices already filled will be automatically locked as per counselling schedule.
Note: If the candidate does not fill choices for any College, will not be allotted any seat during
the counselling
IMPORTANT:
Don’t wait till the last minute to Register and Lock your choices. Please go through your
submitted choices before locking, as once you lock the choices they cannot be modified or
changed even if you have made a mistake. It may result in allotment of a seat which you never
wanted. (Please note that the choices once locked cannot be unlocked even by the Selection
Committee)
Q. No. 7: Is it necessary to join allotted College of Round 1 to get chance to participate in Round 2?
Ans: No, candidates need not report or join the allotted College of Round 1 since there is free exit.
However, if they want to retain the Round 1 seat and upgrade in Round 2 they have to
physically join the College of Round 1 and participate in Round 2 online.
Q. No. 8: Can a candidate participate in Round 2 without submitting fresh choices (based on choices
submitted before Round-1)?
Ans: Fresh choice submission by eligible candidates, as mentioned above is necessary for
consideration for seat allotment during any Round. If candidate does not submit fresh
choice(s) during choice filling period, the candidate will not be considered for allotment of
seat during Round- 2 and will retain the already joined seat, if any
Q. No.9: If I opt to participate in Round 2 of counselling whether my allotted seat
(of Round 1) will be cancelled?
Ans: In case you are not allotted any seat in the Round 2, you will retain earlier allotted seat in
Round 1 if you had joined already. However, on reallottment of a seat in Round 2, the earlier
allotted seat in Round 1 will automatically be cancelled and allotted to another candidate.
Therefore, you are advised to fill in only choices which you prefer over the earlier allotted
seat, for Round 2.
Q. No. 10: - What is the procedure for Round 3 Counselling which will be conducted by
Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee for BNYS Medical Degree Course?
Ans. Since reallotment is allowed in Round-3, The net vacant seats due to Not allotted / non joining,
non-reporting of Round 2 and any converted seats due to lack of candidates in the particular
quota and the virtual vacancies will be published in the seat matrix and eligible candidates
43
have to submit fresh choices and the result will be processed as per Choice & Merit applying
the rule of Reservation.
Q. No. 12: How much time will I be given to join the allotted College?
Ans: Candidates allotted seats will be required to join the allotted College/course within the
stipulated time which is mentioned in counselling schedule. However, candidates are advised
to join as early as possible and not to wait for last day of joining, due to different schedule of
holiday (including local holidays) / working hours in various Yoga & Naturopathy Medical
Colleges. Therefore, candidates are advised to contact allotted College immediately after
declaration of result of counselling allotment process, to know the details. If candidate fails to
join the allotted College within stipulated time, then the allotted seat will be cancelled. For
Round 3 and Stray Round as there is very little time for the entire counselling process and
there is no process of reallotment/resignation, downloading of allotment order after payment of
Tuition Fees will be considered as Joined. But the candidate has to report to the allotted
College within the stipulated time. If the candidate does not report candidates will be treated as
Discontinued and his seat will be considered vacant and candidates will forfeit the advance
Tuition Fees.
Please note that under no circumstances date of joining/date of reporting can be extended by
the Selection Committee.
Q. No. 13: What documents are required at the time of Joining/ Reporting to the allotted College?
Ans: The following original documents (along with attested photocopies) are required at the time of
joining/reporting to the allotted College:
i. Class X Mark Sheet
ii. Class XI Mark Sheet.
iii. H.S.C. Mark sheet or any other equivalent examination.
iv. Transfer certificate obtained after the completion of H.S.C / equivalent examination or
any other courses.
v. Certificate for proof of study from VI Std. to XII Std for the candidates who have
studied completely in Tamil Nadu.
vi. Community Certificate. (if applicable)
vii. Nativity certificate.
viii. Eligibility Certificate (if applicable)
ix. Special Category Certificate (if applicable)
Q. No. 14: In case candidate had to apply for both Govt. Quota in SF Colleges and for management
quota should the candidate pay the fee for both?
44
Ans. Yes. As per the policy, the candidate has to pay both the fees. In this case the candidate will
have to pay fee for GQ in SF Colleges. Rs.10000/- plus for MQ
Rs.25,000/- as Advance Tuition Fee in addition to the Online Processing Fee Rs.500/- for GQ
and Rs.1000/- for MQ.
Q. No.15: Will the Selection Committee bear the bank charges incurred by the candidate while
registering for counselling?
Ans: No. Bank Charges if any, incurred by the candidate should be borne by the candidate only.
Q. No.16: Will the Selection Committee pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition Fee?
Ans: No. The Selection Committee will not pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition Fee.
Q. No. 17: If I forget my password that I have created during the process of registration, how to
retrieve it?
Ans: To retrieve the forgotten password, system facilitates the following process:
The candidate is required to enter the information that candidates filled at the time of
registration and then security question & answer thereon to be entered as given during New
Candidate registration process. The above data submitted by candidate will be validated with
the registered candidate’s database. If the above entries match, then only the candidate would
be permitted to enter new password to proceed further.
IMPORTANT:
Please keep the information same as that you have furnished on the application form
confidential, and do not share the password and OTP with anybody as to register for online
allotment process and submit choice you need that information. If somebody else uses that
information, candidates can misuse your online registration and prevent you from taking part
in online allotment process. Keep print out of application form ready for reference with you.
45
LIST OF ANNEXURES
ANNEXURES Name
Annexure - I List of Self-financing Yoga & Naturopathy Medical Colleges
Annexure -, II Certificate of Nativity of Tamil Nadu
Annexure - III Religious Minority Certificate
Annexure – III-A Proforma for Religious Minority Certificate
Annexure – IV Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent / Guardian
Annexure - V Medical Certificate for Administration of Hepatitis-B vaccination
Annexure – VI Agreement bond form for Candidates admitted for BNYS Course
Annexure - VII Income Certificate
Annexure – VIII FAQs regarding Counselling Process
46
LIST OF COMMUNITIES
2025-2026
LIST SHOWING THE SCHEDULED
CASTES,
SCHEDULED TRIBES, BACKWARD
CLASSES, BACKWARD CLASS-
MUSLIMS,
MOST BACKWARD CLASSES
AND
DENOTIFIED
COMMUNITIES IN THE
STATE OF TAMILNADU
LIST OF COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE OF TAMILNADU
LISTOF BACKWARD CLASSES, MOST BACKWARD CLASSES,
DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES THROUGH OUT THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU
UNLESS AND OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
1. G.O.Ms.No.85 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 29.7.2008
2. G.O.Ms.No.96, Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 8.9.2008
3. G.O.Ms.No.97 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 11.9.2008
4. G.O.Ms.No.37 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 21.5.2009
5. G.O.Ms.No.98 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and Minorities welfare
Department dated 5.1.2009.
47
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASSES
Sl.No Name of the Caste
1. Agamudayar including Thozhu or Thuluva Vellala
2. AgaramVellan Chettiar
3. Alwar, Azhavar and Alavar(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli
District.)
4. Servai (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Pudukottai Districts.)
5. Nulayar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
6. Archakarai Vellala
7. Aryavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
8. Ayira Vaisyar
9. Badagar
10. Billava
11. Bondil
12. Boyas (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem,
Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts).
PeddaBoyar (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
Oddars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai,Theni and Dindigul Districts)
Kaloddars (except Kancheepuram, Chegalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukkottai, Tiruchirappalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
Nellorepet oddars (except Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
Sooramari oddars (except Salem and Namakkal Districts)
13 Chakkala (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts)
14. Chavalakarar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
15. Chettuor Chetty (including Kottar Chetty, ElurChetty, Pathira Chetty, Valayal Chetty,
Pudukadai Chetty)(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
16. Chowdry
16(A) Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Castes irrespective of the generation of conversion
(except the Paravar conversion to Christianity of Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk
of Tenkasi District) for the purpose of reservation of seats in Educational Institutions and for
seats in Public Services.
16(B). C.S.I formerly S.I.U.C (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
17. Donga Dasaris (except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts.
48
18. Devangar,Sedar
19. Dombs (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
Dommars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Thiruvannamalai Districts)
20. Enadi
21. Ezhavathy (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
22. Ezhuthachar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
23. Ezhuva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
24. Gangavar
25. Gavara, Gavarai and Vadugar (Vaduvar) (other than Kamma, Kapu, Balija and Reddi)
26. Gounder
27. Gowda (including Gammala, Kalali and Anuppa Gounder)
28. Hegde
29. Idiga
30. Illathu Pillaimar, Illuvar, Ezhuvar and Illathar
31. Jhetty
32. Jogis (Except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
33. Kabbera
34 Kaikolar, Sengunthar
35. Kaladi(exceptSivaganga,Virudhunagar,Ramanathapuram,Madurai,Theni,
Dindigul,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
36. Kalari Kurup including Kalari Panicker (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk
of Tenkasi District)
37. Kalingi
38. Kallar, Easanattu Kallar , Gandharva Kottai Kallars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Tiruvarur, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts).
Kootappal Kallars (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur
Districts)
Piramalai Kallars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur Districts)
Periyasooriyur Kallars (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
39. Kallar Kula Thondaman
40. Kalveli Gounder
41. Kambar
42. Kammalar or Viswakarma, Viswakarmala (including Thattar, Porkollar, Kannar, Karumar,
Kollar, Thacher, Kal Thacher, Kamsala and Viswa brahmin.)
49
43. Kani, Kanisu, Kaniyar Panicker
44. Kaniyala Vellalar
45. Kannada Saineegar, Kannadiyar (Throughout the State) and Dasapalanjika (Coimbatore,
Erode, Tiruppur and the Nilgiris Districts)
46. Kannadiya Naidu
47. Karpoora Chettiar
48. Karuneegar (Seer Karuneegar, Sri Karuneegar, Sarattu Karuneegar, Kaikatti Karuneegar,
Mathuvazhi Kanakkar, Sozhi Kanakkar and Sunnambu Karuneegar)
49. Kasukkara Chettiar
50. Katesar, Pattamkatti
51. Kavuthiyar
52. Kerala Mudali
53. Kharvi
54. Khatri
55. Kongu Vaishnava
56. Kongu Vellalars( including Vellala Gounder, Nattu Gounder, Narambukkatti Gounder,
Tirumudi Vellalar, Thondu Vellalar, Pala Gounder, Poosari Gounder, Anuppa Vellala
Gounder, Padaithalai Gounder, Chendalai Gounder, Pavalankatti Vellala Gounder,
Palavellala Gounder, Sanku Vellala Gounder and Rathinagiri Gounder).
57. Koppala Velama
58. Koteyar
59. Krishnavaka (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
60. Kudikara Vellalar
61. Kudumbi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
62. Kuga Vellalar
63. Kunchidigar
63(A) Latin Catholics except Latin Catholic Vannar in Kanniyakumari District.
63(B) Lathin Catholics in Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
64. Lambadi
65. Lingayat (Jangama)
66. Mahratta (Non-Brahmin)(including Namdev Mahratta)
67. Malayar
68. Male
69. Maniagar
70. Maravars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinum , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
71. Moondrumandai Enbathunalu (84) Ur.Sozhia Vellalar
72. Mooppan
73. Muthuraja, Muthiriyar, Muttiriyar, Mutharaiyar
74. Nadar, Shanar and Gramani including Christian Nadar, Christian Shanar and Christian
Gramani.
50
75. Nagaram
76. Naikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
77. Nangudi Vellalar
78. Nanjil Mudali (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
79. Odar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
80. Odiya
81. Oottruvalanattu Vellalar
82. O.P.S.Vellalar
83. Ovachar
84. Paiyur Kotta Vellalar
85. Pamulu
86. Panar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
community is a Scheduled Caste)
86A Pandiya Vellalar
87 -Omitted-
88. Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District
89. Pannirandam Chettiar or Uthama Chettiar
90. Parkavakulam (including Surithimar, Nathamar, Malayamar, Moopanar and Nainar)
91. Perike (including Perike Balija)
92. Perumkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
93. Podikara Vellalar
94. Pooluva Gounder
95. Poraya
96. Pulavar (in Coimbatore and Tiruppur Districts)
97. Pulluvar or Pooluvar
98. Pusala
99. Reddy (Ganjam)
100. Sadhu Chetty (including Telugu Chetty, Twenty four Manai Telungu Chetty)
101. Sakkaravar or Kavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District )
102. Salivagana
103. Saliyar, Padmasaliyar, Pattusaliyar, Pattariyar and Adhaviyar
104. Savalakkarar
105. Senaithalaivar, Senaikudiyar and Illaivaniar
105A Serakula Vellalar
106. Sourashtra (Patnulkarar)
107. Sozhiavellalar (including Sozha Vellalar, Vetrilaikarar, Kodikalkarar and Keeraikarar)
108. Srisayar
109. Sundaram Chetty
51
109A Thiyya
110. Thogatta Veerakshatriya
111. Tholkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
112. Tholuva Naicker and Vetalakara Naicker
113 -Omitted-
114. Thoriyar
115. Ukkirakula Kshatriya Naicker
116. Uppara, Uppillia and Sagara
117. Urali Gounder ( except Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
District) and Orudaya Gounder or Oorudaya Gounder (in Madurai ,Theni, Dindigul,
Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai,
Salem and Namakkal Districts )
118. Urikkara Nayakkar
118A Virakodi Vellala
119 Vallambar
119.A Vallanattu Chettiar
120. Valmiki
121. Vaniyar, Vania Chettiar (including Gandla, Ganika, Telikula and Chekkalar)
122. Veduvar and Vedar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
123. Veerasaiva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
124. Velar
125. Vellan Chettiar
126. Veluthodathu Nair (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
Vokkaligar (including Vakkaligar, Okkaligar, Kappiliyar, Kappiliya, Okkaliga Gowda, Okkaliya-
127.
Gowder, Okkaliya Gowda )
128. Wynad Chetty (The Nilgiris District)
Yadhava (including Idaiyar, Telugu Speaking Idaiyar known as Vaduga Ayar or Vaduga Idaiyar
129.
or Golla and Asthanthra Golla)
130. Yavana
131. Yerukula
Converts to Christianity from any Hindu Backward Classes Community or Most Backward
Classes Community or Denotified Communities (except the Converts to Christianity from
131A
Meenavar, Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar, Mukkuvar or Mukayar and
Paravar)
Orphans and destitute children who have lost their parents before reaching the age of ten and
are destitutes; and who have nobody else to take care of them either by law or custom; and
132. also who are admitted into any of the schools or orphanages run by the Government or
recognized by the Government.
52
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASS MUSLIMS
1. Ansar
2. Dekkani Muslims
3. Dudekula
4. Labbais including Rowthar and Marakayar (whether their spoken language is Tamil or Urdu)
5. Mapilla
6. Sheik
7. Syed
LIST OF MOST BACKWARDS CLASSES COMMUNITIES
1 Ambalakarar
2 Andipandaram
2(A) Arayar (in Kanniyakumari District)
3 Bestha, Siviar
4 Bhatraju (other than Kshatriya Raju)
5 Boyar, Oddar
6 Dasari
7 Dommara
8 Eravallar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where
the community is a Scheduled Tribe )
9 Isaivellalar
10 Jambuvanodai
11 Jangam
12 Jogi
13 Kongu Chettiar (in Coimbatore and Erode Districts only)
14 Koracha
15 Kulala (including Kuyavar and Kumbarar)
16 Kunnuvar Mannadi
17 Kurumba, Kurumba Gounder
18 Kuruhini Chetty
18(A) Latin Catholic Christian Vannar (in Kanniyakumari District)
19 Maruthuvar, Navithar, Mangala, Velakattalavar, Velakatalanair and Pronopakari
20 Mond Golla
21 Moundadan Chetty
22 Mahendra, Medara
23 Mutlakampatti
24 Narikoravar (Kurivikars)
25 Nokkar
53
25(A) Panisaivan/Panisivan
Vanniakula Kshatriya (including Vanniyar, Vanniya, Vannia Gounder, Gounder or Kander,
26
Padayachi, Palli and Agnikula Kshatriya)
27 Paravar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
Community is a Scheduled Caste)
27A Paravar converts to Christianity including the Paravar converts to Christianity of
Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk in Tenkasi District.
28 Meenavar (Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar) (including converts to Christianity )
29 Mukkuvar or Mukayar (including converts to Christianity)
30 Punnan Vettuva Gounder
31 Pannayar (other than Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District)
32 Sathatha Srivaishnava (including Sathani, Chattadi and Chattada Srivaishnava)
33 Sozhia Chetty
34 Telugupatty Chetty
35 Thottia Naicker ( including Rajakambalam, Gollavar, Sillavar, Thockalavar , Thozhuva
Naicker and Erragollar)
36 Thondaman
36(A) Thoraiyar (Nilgris)
36(B) Thoraiyar (Plains)
36(C) Transgender or Eunuch (Thirunangai or Aravani)
37 Valaiyar (including Chettinad Valayars)
38 Vannar (Salavai Thozhilalar)(including Agasa, Madivala, Ekali, Rajakula, Veluthadar and
Rajaka) (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District where the
community is a Scheduled Caste)
39 Vettaikarar
40 Vettuva Gounder
41 Yogeeswarar
LIST OF DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
1 Attur Kilnad Koravars (Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore, Villupuram, kallakurichi,
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga and Virudhunagar Districts)
2 Attur Melnad Koravars (Salem and Namakkal District)
3 Appanad Kondayamkottai Maravar (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai,
Theni and Dindigul Districts )
4 Ambalakarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
5 Ambalakkarar (Suriyanur, Tiruchirapalli District)
6 Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem, Namakkal,
Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts)
7 Battu Turkas
54
8 C.K.Koravars (Cuddalore, Villupuram and Kallakurichi Districts)
9 Chakkala (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Madurai,
Theni, Dindigul and the Nilgiris Districts)
10 Changyampudi Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
11 Chettinad Valayars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
12 Dombs (Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
13 Dobba Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
14 Dommars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
15 Donga Boya
16 Donga Ur.Korachas
17 Devagudi Talayaris
18 Dobbai Korachas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts )
19 Dabi Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts )
20 Donga Dasaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
21 Gorrela Dodda Boya
22 Gudu Dasaris
23 Gandarvakottai Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Cuddalore, Villupuram and
Kallakurichi Districts)
24 Gandarvakottai Kallars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and
Pudukottai Districts)
25 Inji Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
26 Jogis (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Chennai, Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
27 Jambavanodai
28 Kaladis (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and
Ariyalur Districts )
55
29 Kal Oddars (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai,
Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem
and Namakkal Districts)
30 Koravars (Kancheepuram , Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Pudukottai,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Thiravarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukadi, Chennai,
Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts )
31 Kalinji Dabikoravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai
Districts)
32 Kootappal Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
33 Kala Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
34 Kalavathila Boyas
35 Kepmaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur
Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts )
36 Maravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi and Toothukudi
Districts)
37 Monda Koravars
38 Monda Golla (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
39 Mutlakampatti (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalaur and Pudukottai Districts)
40 Nokkars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
41 Nellorepet Oddars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
42 Oddars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts)
43 Pedda Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
44 Ponnai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
45 Piramalai Kallars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur Districts)
46 Peria Suriyur Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalurand Pudukottai Districts)
47 Padayachi (Vellayan Kuppam in Cuddalore District and Tennore in Tiruchirapalli District )
48 Punnan Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts )
49 Servai (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
56
50 Salem Melnad Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur,
Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Salem, Namakkal, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
51 Salem Uppu Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
52 Sakkaraithamadai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
53 Saranga Palli Koravars
54 Sooramari Oddars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
55 Sembanad Maravars (Sivaganga, Virudunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
56 Thalli Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
57 Telungapatti Chetis (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
58 Thottia Naickers (Sivaganga , Virudunagar, Ramanathapuram, Kancheepuram,
Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi,
Salem, Namakkal, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet, Tiruvannamalai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
59 Thogamalai Koravars or Kepmaris (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai Districts)
60 Uppukoravars or Settipalli Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts)
61 Urali Gounders (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
62 Wayalpad or Nawalpeta Korachas
63 Vaduvarpatti Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
64 Valayars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur Pudukottai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
65 Vettaikarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts)
66 Vetta Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
67 Varaganeri Koravars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
68 Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
57
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED CASTES)
1 Adi Andhra
2 Adi Dravida
3 Adi Karnataka
4 Ajila
5 Aruthathiyar
6 Ayyanavar (in Kanyakumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
7 Baira
8 Bakuda
9 Bandi
10 Bellara
11 Bharata (In Kanykumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District.
12 Chakkiliyan
13 Chalavadi
14 Chamar, Muchi
15 Chandala
16 Cheruman
17 Devendrakula Velalar (Devendrakulanathan, Kadaiyan (excluding in the coastal areas of
Tirunalveli, thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Tiruvarur and
Nagapattinam district), Kalladi, Kudumban, Pallan, Pannadi, Vathiriyan)
18 Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano
19 Domban
20 Godagali
21 Godda
22 Gosangi
23 Holeya
24 Jaggali
25 Jambuvulu
26 Kadaiyan (in the districts of Tirunelveli, Thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai,
Thanjavur, Tiruvarrur and Nagapattinam)
27 Kakkalan (in kanyakumari districts and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
28 -Omitted-
29 Kanakkan, Padanna (in the Nilgiris district)
30 Karimpalan
31 Kavara (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
32 Koliyan
33 Koosa
34 Kootan, Koodan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
58
35 -Omitted-
36 Kuravan, Sidhanar
37 Madari
38 Madiga
39 Maila
40 Mala
41 Mannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
42 Mavilan
43 Mager
44 Mundala
45 Nalakeyava
46 Nayadi
47 Padannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
48 Pagadi
49 -Omitted-
50 Palluvan
51 Pambada
52 Panan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
53 Panchama
54 -Omitted-
55 Panniandi
56 Paraiyan, Parayan, Sambavar
57 Paravan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
58 Pathiyan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
59 Pulayan, Cheramar
60 Puthirai Vannan
61 Raneyar
62 Samagara
63 Samban
64 Sapari
65 Semman
66 Thandan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
67 Thoti
68 Tiruvalluvar
69 Vallon
70 Valluvan
71 Vannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
72 -Omitted-
73 Velan
59
74 Vetan (in Kanyakumari and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
75 Vettiyan
76 Vettuvan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah of Tirunelvelli district)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED TRIBES) TAMILNADU
1. Adiyan
2. Aranadan
3. Eravallan
4. Irular.
5. Kadar
6. Kammara (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
7. Kanikaran, Kanikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah and
Ambasamudram taluk of Tirunelveli District).
8. Kaniyan, Kanyan.
9. Kattunayakan.
10. Kochu Velan.
11. Konda Kapus.
12. Kondareddis.
13. Koraga.
14. Kota (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
15. Kudiya, Melakudi.
16. Kurichchan.
17. Kurumbas (in the Nilgiris District).
18. Kurumans.
19. MahaMalasar.
20. MalaiArayan.
60
21. MalaiPandaram.
22. Malai Vedan.
23. Malakkuravan.
24. Malasar.
25. Malayali (in Dharmapuri, Vellore, Pudukottai, Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore,
Tiruvannamalai, Villupuram, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur Districts).
26. Malayakandi.
27. Mannan.
28. Mudugar,Muduvan.
29. Muthuvan.
30. Pallayan.
31. Palliyan.
32. Palliyar.
33. Paniyan.
34. Sholaga.
35. Toda (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli District).
36. Uraly.
61