GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
PROSPECTUS FOR ADMISSION TO
DIPLOMA IN INTEGRATED PHARMACY (D.I.P.)
and
DIPLOMA IN NURSING THERAPY (D.N.T.) COURSES
2025-2026 SESSION
(As per G.O (D). No.997/ Health and Family Welfare [IM I-2]
Dept., dated: 02.09.2025 and as amended from time to time).
LAST DATE FOR SUBMISSION OF FILLED IN ONLINE
APPLICATION FORM
UPTO 23.09.2025 BEFORE 5.00 PM.
SELECTION COMMITTEE,
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY,
ARIGNAR ANNA GOVT. HOSPITAL OF INDIAN MEDICINE CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI- 600 106.
Phone No: 044-26216244
Websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org
1
IMPORTANT INFORMATIONS
1 Date of Notification 09-09-2025
2 Date of Commencement of online09-09-2025
application
3 Last date for submission of online23-09-2025 upto 5:00 P.M.
application
4 Last date for submission of downloaded 23-09-2025 upto 5:00 P.M.
online application form with relevant
documents of Special Category
Candidates through Postal / Courier
Service or submit in Person
5 Counselling for special category: The Secretary,
IN-PERSON ONLY Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine &
Homoeopathy,
Arignar Anna Government Hospital of Indian
Medicine Campus,
Arumbakkam, Chennai – 600 106.
6 Date of declaration of Rank list Will be posted in the official website.
7 Details of counselling Will be posted in the official website.
8 Official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in ,
www.tnayushselection.org
9 Helpline Number 044-26216244
2
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES
1. The prospectus for admission to Diploma in Integrated Pharmacy (D.I.P.) & Diploma in
Nursing Therapy (D.N.T.) Courses for the Academic Year 2025-2026 in Government
School of AYUSH Paramedical Courses at Chennai and Palayamkottai can be accessed
/ downloaded from the following official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org. The Candidates and parents are advised to read the
Prospectus carefully before filling the Registration form. No correspondence / request
for re-consideration will be entertained.
2. The application for Diploma in Integrated Pharmacy (D.I.P.) & Diploma in Nursing
Therapy (D.N.T.) Courses for the Academic Year 2025-2026 in Government School of
AYUSH Paramedical Courses can only be submitted online through Tamil Nadu
AYUSH Selection Committee websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org Application submitted through any other mode shall not be
entertained.
3. a. The registration fee for the application form to apply Diploma in Integrated
Pharmacy (D.I.P.) & Diploma in Nursing Therapy (D.N.T.) Courses is Rs. 350/-
(Rupees Three Hundred and Fifty Only), which is non-refundable. The
Candidates applying under Special category for Children of Ex-Servicemen,
Eminent Sports Person, and Person with Bench mark Disability (PwD) should
pay an additional fee of Rs.100/- (non-refundable) for each special category. All
the payment should be done through the online bank payment portal available on
the official website.
b. Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Caste (Arunthathiyar) (SCA) / Scheduled
Tribe (ST) Candidates who are natives of Tamil Nadu are exempted from
payment of the cost of the application.
c. The last date for submission of the online registration form is up to 5:00 P.M. on
00.00.2025. Thereafter there is no provision for the Candidates to submit their
online application form.
d. Candidates should fill all the mandatory fields, upload all required documents,
and submit the duly completed online application. Candidates are advised to
download and retain a copy of their application submitted for future references.
Submission of supporting documents at a later stage will not be accepted,
whether by courier, post, or in person.
3
4. a. Qualified and eligible Candidates are required to register through ONLINE on
the Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee website,
www.tnayushselection.org to participate in the counselling process for
allotment of seat. Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee does not allot any
seat manually (Except Special Category Seats).
b. Candidates are deemed to have read, agreed and accepted this Prospectus and the
terms and conditions of the counselling mentioned in this prospectus for Tamil
Nadu State 2025-2026 Diploma in Integrated Pharmacy (D.I.P.) & Diploma in
Nursing Therapy (D.N.T.) Courses on completing the online submission of
application form.
c. Before filling up the Application form, read all the instructions carefully.
Candidates are further advised to fill the application form on their own on the
Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee website and not through any agent
or third party. Any mistake committed by the Candidate will prejudice one’s
selection.
5. a. Candidates applying under Special Category viz., Children of Ex-servicemen,
Eminent Sports Person and Persons with Benchmark Disabilities are instructed
to submit their application through online only.
b. One Candidate can apply a maximum of three Special Categories. For each
special category Rs.100 / - has to be paid separately through online portal. The
claim under Special Category will not be considered, under any circumstances
without the required documents.
c. Special category rank differs completely from that of the General Category rank.
d. Special category Candidates cannot claim the same rank in the General category
and vice versa.
e. All the special category Candidates except eminent sports persons should submit
the hard copy of their online application form along with the relevant supportive
documents to the selection committee address mentioned below.
f. Candidates applied under the eminent sports person category will be called in
person (Date and time will be intimated through the Selection Committee
Official Websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org ) with
their original Sports Certificates and relevant documents along with the hard
copy of their online application form for Certificate Verification.
4
g. All the special category Candidates should submit the hard copy of application
along with all the relevant supportive documents to:
The Secretary,
Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy,
Arumbakkkam, Chennai – 600 106.
h. Counselling for the special categories will be done before the General
Category counselling. The Candidate has to appear in person along with all the
relevant original certificate at the Selection Committee Office for all special
category counseling
i. In case of unavoidable circumstances special category Candidate can authorize
his/her parents on his/her behalf for counselling. The parent’s decision will be
binding on the Candidate. An authorization letter given by the Candidate
should be submitted by the parents along with original documents of any one
of the identification proofs such as voter id, driving license, pan card, pass
port. Aadhar card etc., of both the parents and Candidate has mentioned in the
ANNEXURE VIII (A) and VIII (B).
6. Provisional Rank list of the eligible Candidates and the counselling Schedule will be
posted in the official website: www.tnayushselection.org. The Application Registration
Number (A.R. No.) will appear in the provisional rank list.
7. The Candidates are instructed to visit the official websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org at least twice a day for latest updates from the date of issue
of application to till the end of admission process without fail. Further, any change or
modification and relevant information pertaining to this counselling / admission process
will be made available on the official website only.
8. Selection Committee will not be responsible for consequences resulting due to non-
diligent follow up of notices, notification and publications appearing on the website
regarding admission to DIP/DNT Courses.
9. Request for extension of time for submission of registration after the specified date and
time will not be entertained.
10. This Prospectus is applicable for Diploma in Integrated Pharmacy (D.I.P.) & Diploma in
Nursing Therapy (D.N.T.) Courses for the Academic Year 2025-2026 in Government
School of AYUSH Paramedical Courses.
5
11. *PAYMENT DETAILS
OC / BC /
Cost Details BCM / SC/SCA/ST Time of Payment
MBC
Registration fee for
Rs. 350/- Exempted At the time of registration
online application
Rs. 100/-
Special Category Exempted At the time of registration
(for each)
Online Processing
Rs. 350/- Rs. 350/- Before choice filling
Fee
Advance Tuition Fee
Rs. *3600/- Rs. 3600/- At the time of choice locking
for D.I.P.
At the time of choice locking
Advance Tuition Fee (RS.3600/-) and At the time
Rs. *7200/- Rs. 7200/-
for D.N.T. of downloading the allotment
order (Rs.3600/-)
Note: * Proposals for enhancement of fee as Rs.8000/-(Rupees Eight Thousand
only) for both DIP/DNT Courses for the academic year 2025-26 has been sent to
Tamil Nadu Government for approval. Upon the receipt of the approval, the
Candidate has to pay the remaining fees to the School of AYUSH Paramedical
Courses where he/she is studying.
12. DURATION OF THE DIP/DNT COURSES:
The duration of study for both the Courses shall be 2½ (Two and a half) years including
six months of Non-Stipendiary Compulsory Rotatory Internship training at various
hospitals of this Department.
13. Medium of Instruction:
English & Tamil shall be the Medium of Instruction for all the subjects of study
and for examinations to the said Courses.
14. The students shall have to make their own arrangements for stay and travel during the
period of study and training. The intention of conducting these courses is to technically
train the candidates to professionally function as Integrated Pharmacist and Nursing
Therapist. The Government does not assure any employment to the holder.
15. Curriculum:
The Curriculum and the Syllabi for the courses shall be prescribed by the Governing
Council for AYUSH Paramedical Courses of this department from time to time.
6
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
COMMISSIONERATE OF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY
PROSPECTUS
Clause Prospectus
No.
1. Eligibility Criteria
The Candidate should be a citizen of India. Foreign nationals are NOT eligible to apply for
admission to DIP/DNT Courses.
2. Nativity
a. Candidate should be a native of Tamil Nadu.
b. Other State Candidates who have studied from VI Standard to XII Standard
continuously in Tamil Nadu, have to produce their School Bonafide Certificate
from the School in which Candidate studied VI standard to XII standard and they
will be considered under the Open Category
c. Candidates who are native of Tamil Nadu studied from VI to XII Std., either partly
or completely in Schools situated outside Tamil Nadu should upload the “Nativity
Certificate”. Such Candidates should also give an undertaking that they have not
applied for any Educational Institution in any other State, claiming the nativity of
such State for admission. If it is found later that the Candidate has applied as a
native of any other State other than Tamil Nadu, then the admission will be
cancelled at any stage. Further, even during the Course of study if it is subsequently
found that any Candidate has produced a false nativity certificate or given a false
undertaking, it will result in expulsion of the Candidate from the Course and also
initiation of criminal proceedings against the Candidate as well as his/her parents as
per provision of the law.
d. The Certificate of Nativity in Tamil Nadu should be issued by the Competent
Authority only in the Specified format available in the prospectus (as in
Annexure –II).
e. Applications without a proper Nativity Certificate will not be considered.
f. Candidates belonging to other States and residing in Tamil Nadu cannot claim
nativity of Tamil Nadu.
g. Permanent Residence Certificate in lieu of Nativity Certificate will not be accepted.
h. The Nativity Certificate obtained in older format or e-Nativity Certificate obtained
7
in the latest updated format issued not below the rank of Zonal Deputy Tahsildar of
the concerned Revenue Jurisdiction is accepted.
i. Community Certificate of the Candidates or either one of his/her parents obtained
from other States will not be considered for reservation.
Note: This nativity clause is subject to the outcome of the Writ Petitions
(W.P.Nos.23656, 23547, 24217, 25565, 28140, 28778, 28779 and 23950 of 2017&
29513 of 2022) pending before the Honorable High Court of Madras.
j. Producing false Nativity Certificate or any other Certificate required for the
selection and admission, even if detected at any time later during the Course of
study or even after the completion of the Course will result in expulsion of the
Candidate or withdrawal of Diploma Certificate, as the case may be, along with
initiation of Criminal proceedings against the Candidates. (Also read with Clause
13.12.)
3. AGE LIMIT:
All the Candidates should have completed 17 years of age on or before 31st December
2025 and the maximum age limit is 35 years for the Candidates belongs to SC/ SC(A) / ST
and 30 years for the Candidates belongs to other Communities.
4. COMMUNITY CERTIFICATE:
a. Candidates should produce Community Certificate obtained from the Revenue
authorities of their respective districts with competent jurisdiction as detailed
below:
S. No. Name of the Community Issuing Authority
1. Scheduled Tribe (ST) Revenue Divisional Officer of their
native place or Sub-Collector of their
Districts (except Chennai) or P.A
(General) to Collector of Chennai. The
Community Certificate card issued by
Tahsildars upto 11.11.89 is valid.
2. Scheduled Caste (SC) / Scheduled Tahsildar of Native Taluk of the
Caste Arunthathiyar (SCA) Candidate
3. Backward Class (BC) / Backward Headquarters Deputy Tahsildar / Zonal
Class Muslim (BCM) / Most Deputy Tahsildar / Deputy Tahsildar
Backward Class (MBC) / (Certificates)
Denotified Communities (DNC)
8
b. The candidature claimed after submission of application without Community
Certificate will be treated only as open category.
c. If a Candidate of Tamil Nadu origin obtains community certificate from other
State, Candidates will be considered under Open Category only if Candidates
fulfill the norms otherwise.
d. If a Candidate submits a false / fabricated Community Certificate, Nativity
Certificate or any other Certificate, if it is found at a later point during the Course
of the study, it will result in expulsion of the Candidate from the Course and also
legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated against the Candidate and
their parents as per provision of law.
5. EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS:
a. Candidates must have passed in all the subjects of the qualifying examination of the
Higher Secondary Certificate Examination (Academic) by the Tamil Nadu State
Board or the Senior Secondary School Examination under CBSE Pattern or
equivalent examination with the following group of subjects.
i. Physics, Chemistry and Biology/ Biotechnology (or)
ii. Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology
b. Candidates who have passed in National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) and
private Candidates are eligible to apply for the above Courses.
c. Minimum Eligibility Marks:
i. For OC:
Minimum of 45% marks in aggregate in the Science subjects namely Physics,
Chemistry and Biology/Biotechnology or Botany and Zoology.
ii. For BC, BCM, MBC / DNC:
Minimum of 40% marks in aggregate in the Science subjects namely Physics,
Chemistry and Biology/Biotechnology or Botany and Zoology.
iii. For SC / SCA / ST:
Minimum of 35% marks in aggregate in the Science subjects namely Physics,
Chemistry and Biology/Biotechnology or Botany and Zoology.
6. INELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
a. Candidates who have passed Higher Secondary Certificate Examination in
Vocational Stream, Pre-University Course in Tamil Nadu and who used scribe and
not studied English as a subject in Higher Secondary Certificate Examination or
equivalent examination.
9
b. Candidates currently pursuing DIP and DNT Courses are not eligible to get
admission for the same programs
c. Candidate who are native of other States and studied in other States.
7. List of Government Schools of AYUSH Paramedical Courses:
The courses will be conducted at the following two Government Schools:
S. No. Name of the Institution Sanctioned Sanctioned
Strength for strength for
D.I.P. D.N.T.
1. Government School of AYUSH Paramedical
Courses, Arignar Anna Government Hospital
of Indian Medicine Campus, Arumbakkam, 50 50
Chennai – 600 106.
2. Government School of AYUSH Paramedical
Courses, Government Siddha Medical College
Campus, Palayamkottai, Tirunelveli District – 50 50
627 002.
Note: No Hostel facility is provided for the students enrolling in the Diploma courses.
8. Allocation of Seats:
1. For Diploma in Integrated Pharmacy (D.I.P.) Course: 50 seats in each of the
Government Schools of AYUSH Paramedical Courses, out of which 25 seats will be
reserved for men and 25 seats will be reserved for women. If male candidates are not
available then the seats reserved for men will be filled up with female candidates and vice
versa.
2. For Diploma in Nursing Therapy (D.N.T.) Course: 50 seats in each of the Government
Schools of AYUSH Paramedical Courses, out of which 25 seats will be reserved for men
and 25 seats will be reserved for women. If male candidates are not available then the seats
reserved for men will be filled up with female candidates and vice versa.
9. PROCEDURE FOR FILLING AND SUBMISSION OF ONLINE APPLICATION
FORM
a. Candidates/parents are advised to download and print the Prospectus from the
10
official website and read it thoroughly before filling the online registration form for
the academic year 2025–2026.
b. The Candidate should log in to the official website: www.tnayushselection.org
c. Registration forms will be available online from 09-09-2025 to 23-09-2025 up to
5:00 P.M
d. Candidates must pay a non-refundable registration fee of Rs.350 /- (Rupees Three
Hundred and Fifty only) towards online application form through the online
payment portal. This fee is exempted for the Candidates belongs to SC/SCA/ST.
e. Candidate has to fill all the mandatory columns in the online application. All the
relevant documents should be uploaded in PDF format. Candidates are instructed to
submit the online application after filling up all the required fields.
f. Request for change of any particulars after submitting the online application form
shall not be entertained under any circumstances.
g. Candidates are instructed to upload the following certificates while filling the
online application form and submit.
1. Passport size photograph
2. Candidate’s Signature in running handwriting with Blue or black ink in a paper,
scan and upload.
3. Class X Mark Sheet (both sides) or Birth Certificate
4. Class XI Mark Sheet (both sides of Certificate).
5. H.S.C. Mark Sheet (both sides) or equivalent examination certificate
6. Transfer Certificate obtained after completion of HSC/equivalent or any other
Courses.
7. Candidates of other States need to upload a certificate of proof of study from VI
Std. to XII Std. who have studied completely in Tamil Nadu.
8. Community Certificate
9. Nativity Certificate
10. Documents of Parent need to be uploaded for the Candidate who claim their native
as Tamil Nadu as follows: -
Community Certificate of either one of the parents obtained from the
competent Revenue Authority in Tamil Nadu (Who claims communal
reservation)
11. Front page of the Bank Pass Book or cancelled cheque leaf of the Candidate /
guardian (for refund purpose).
11
12. Special Category Form with relevant certificates for Persons with Ex- Servicemen,
Eminent Sports Person, and Bench mark Disabilities as applicable, along with the
online application form should be uploaded.
13. Court orders (if any).
14. Additional supporting documents (if any)
Note:
a. After submission, Candidates are advised to download and keep a copy of the
filled-in online application form for future reference.
b. All the entries in the online application form should be filled by the Candidate
carefully. The Candidate should ensure that all information including the marks
in the qualifying examination furnished by the Candidate in the application and
the enclosures are true and correct. The Candidate is informed that after proper
scrutiny of the application, if the marks furnished by the Candidate in the
application are not correct or any other information is found to be incorrect, then;
i. Candidates will forfeit the admission, no matter at what stage of the
Course, at that time
ii. Candidates will be debarred from pursuing any other Course for a period
of three years
iii. Legal proceedings / criminal action will be initiated against the Candidate
along with their parents/guardian for furnishing false Mark Sheet / false
Community Certificate / false Nativity Certificate.
c. Even if the Candidate is provisionally selected for the DIP/DNT admission but
found to have failed in +1 examination, the provisional admission of the Candidate
will automatically stand cancelled.
10. Instructions for filling the Online Application Form:
a. Candidate should login to the website www.tnayushselection.org to access
application form for DIP/DNT Courses 2025-2026 session.
b. The Candidate and the parent / guardian must ensure Candidate’s eligibility
criteria before submitting the online application form. The Candidates are
instructed to go through the Prospectus carefully and be clear about all the
instructions with regard to the submission of the online application form.
c. The application form other than the one filled in online mode will not be accepted,
under any circumstances.
12
d. Candidate should fill the following particulars in the online application form:
1. Aadhaar Number of the Candidate.
2. Name of the Candidate
3. Name of the Parent / Guardian
4. Permanent Address / Address for communication
5. Mobile No.
6. Email ID
7. Gender
8. Date of Birth
9. Community, Caste and details
10. Religion
11. Mother tongue
12. Nationality
13. Nativity
14. Qualifying Examination, +2 Roll. No., Year of passing Class EMIS No.
15. Medium of Instruction
16. Marks details
17. Whether studied in Tamil Medium up to X Std. or Higher Secondary Course
18. Whether studied Tamil as a subject in X std. or Higher Secondary Course
19. VI to XII/ Equivalent and Undergoing / completed any professional Courses.
20. State / District of Class VI to XII / Equivalent
21. Special Categories
22. Parent Occupation
23. Annual income of the parent
24. Civic details
25. Native district
26. Uploading documents
i. Passport size photograph must be uploaded in the online application
form. The same should be submitted at the time of admission at the
allotted Government School of AYUSH Paramedical Courses.
ii. The Candidates should upload their signature in running hand writing in
the appropriate box given in the online application form. Placing initials
as signature is not acceptable. Writing full name in the box in capital
13
letters would also not be accepted as signature and the application form
would be rejected.
iii. The Candidates must ensure that photograph and signature are uploaded
in the respective fields.
e. Candidates are instructed to submit only one application form.
f. Candidates should ensure that all information entered in the online application is
correct at the time of online submission of application form.
g. Incomplete applications and applications not in accordance with instruction will not
be considered and are liable to be rejected. The application fee once paid will not
be refunded.
h. Submission of online application and remittance of fee would close as per the
schedule given and no request for extension of time shall be entertained.
Application once submitted cannot be withdrawn.
11. METHOD OF FEE PAYMENT:
i. Mode of payment is through Debit Card / Credit card / Net banking / UPI /
Wallet (G-Pay, Paytm etc.,). Necessary facilities have been provided for
making payment through payment portal by using Net Banking or other
modes.
ii. Candidates must note that mere deduction of fee from the Bank account is not
a proof of fee payment.
iii. Check the validity of the Debit card / Credit card and keep everything ready
while logging on to the website for submitting application form. Candidate
should enter the information asked for and make payment through the portal.
iv. The Advance Tuition Fees will be refunded to the Candidate who has been
st nd
allotted a seat and not joined in 1 and 2 round of counseling, only to the
account whose details are provided along with the application form.
v. The advance Tuition Fees paid to the Selection Committee will be adjusted
towards the Tuition Fee that has to be paid to the School of AYUSH
Paramedical Courses.
vi. The Candidates who discontinue the Course after joining, at any stage after the
cut-off date will forfeit all the fees including the Advance Tuition Fee paid by
him/her.
vii. All payments including the advance Tuition Fee will be forfeited if a
Candidate who has been allotted a seat in the Round 3 or subsequent Rounds
14
and does not join the respective institution. Also, the advance Tuition Fee will
be forfeited if the admission gets cancelled due to any reason. E.g. in case, the
Candidate gives wrong information at the time of registration and on the basis
of which a seat may be allotted and later cancelled by the Admission
Authorities or at the time of reporting the Candidate fails to produce the
required documents (within stipulated time).
12. SPECIAL CATEGORIES WITH THEIR CODE NUMBERS
The list of special categories with their code numbers is furnished in the ANNEXURE – I.
If sufficient number of Candidates are not available for allotment against any of the seats
in DIP/DNT Course reserved for the SPECIAL CATEGORIES listed under ANNEXURE
– I. The vacant seats will be added to the General Pool of seats and filled up with
Candidates from general merit list, applying rule of reservation.
13. METHOD OF SELECTION AND ADMISSION
Selection will be made based on the provisional rank list prepared using the science
subjects marks obtained by the Candidates in their qualifying examinations calculated to
the base of 200 marks. The method of calculation is given below:
Weighted total marks for maximum of :200
Percentage in Biology/Biotechnology (A)
Percentage in Physics and Chemistry taken together (B)
Percentage in Botany and Zoology taken together (C)
Weighted total marks for a maximum of 200 Either (A+B) or (B+C)
Provisional Rank List will be prepared among all eligible Candidates and will be
uploaded in the official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org
Determination of Rank of Candidates obtaining equal aggregate marks:
While arriving rank list, when two or more Candidates obtain equal aggregate marks for
200 based on the marks scored in the Higher Secondary Course or equivalent examination,
the inter se merit / rank of such Candidates shall be determined on the basis of the
following factors in the succeeding order:
 Percentage of marks in Biology/Biotechnology or Botany and Zoology taken together.
 Percentage of marks in Physics and Chemistry taken together.
 Percentage of marks obtained in all subjects.
15
 Date of Birth: Weightage will be given to Seniority in age.
14. RULE OF RESERVATION
14.1. The selection will be made based on provisional rank list and by counselling,
applying rule of reservation as laid down by the Government of Tamil Nadu. BC / BCM
/ MBC (DNC) / SC / SC(A) / ST Candidates are also eligible for selection under open
competition as per merit in addition to the reservation made for them as per their
communities.
Open Competition 31%
Backward Community 26.5%
Backward Community (Muslim) 3.5%
Most Backward Community / 20%
Denotified Community
Scheduled Caste & Scheduled Caste (Arunthathiyar) 18%
(16% of seats out of 18% quota earmarked to SCs shall
be allocated to the SCA communities)
Scheduled Tribe 1%
14.2. All selections and admissions to DIP/DNT Course are only provisional. The
selection and admission are liable to be cancelled at any time as and when the eligibility
conditions are found to be defective or incorrect or of any suppression of facts
deliberately or otherwise. The right of allotment to DIP/DNT Course, Category and
School is vested totally with the Selection Committee.
15. COUNSELLING
a. Selection of Candidate will be done only through online counselling based on
Provisional Rank List.
b. Selection Committee is the Designated Authority for counseling for all
admissions to DIP/DNT Courses in the School of AYUSH Paramedical Courses.
c. No authority or Institution shall admit any Candidate to the DIP/DNT Courses in
contravention of the criteria or procedure as lay down by Commissionerate of
Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy in respect of admissions and any Candidate
admitted in contravention of the said criteria or procedure shall be discharged. The
authority or Institution which grants admission to any student in contravention of
the criteria or procedure shall be liable to face legal action.
d. Candidates should attend the Counselling Rounds as per the schedule mentioned
in official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org.
16
e. Candidates who fail to fill the choice in any round within the stipulated time as
mentioned in the Selection Committee official website, for whatsoever reasons,
will be given a chance to fill their choice and lock them in the subsequent round of
the existing available vacancies only irrespective of their provisional rank.
f. Candidates who are getting allotment, for any other reasons, at a later date or
time after the counselling / individual’s turn is over will be given a seat in the
existing vacancies available in any one of the Schools irrespective of their merit of
marks.
g. The Candidate is eligible to opt for any of the Courses viz. DIP/DNT Courses in
any of the Government School of AYUSH Paramedical Courses based on the
availability of seats during his / her turn.
h. Any remaining unfilled seats for want of adequate number of eligible Candidates
belonging to SC(A) communities shall be filled by Candidates belonging to SC
community other than Arunthathiyars as per merit and vice versa (G.O. (Ms) No.
55, P&AR Dept., dated: 08.04.2010)
i. Any remaining reserved seats in ST quota for want of adequate number of
eligible Candidates belonging to ST community shall be allotted to Candidates
belonging to SC community as per merit (G.O. (Ms) No. 77, Health and Family
Welfare (MCA1) Dept., dated: 24.02.2011).
j. Any remaining unfilled seats in BCM Community for want of adequate number
of eligible Candidates after exhausting the merit list shall be filled up on merit basis
by Candidates belonging to BC community without exceeding the quota for BC
community as a whole (G.O. (Ms) No. 30, Health and Family Welfare (MCA1)
Dept., dated: 18.01.2012).
k. Mutual transfers will not be allowed under any circumstances.
l. Those who obtained allotment order to a particular Course in a particular
category and School during the counselling who do not join within the stipulated
time to that particular Course and School to which they are allotted, will not be
considered for admission at any point of time later.
m. All Communication regarding Counselling and any change or modification and
relevant information pertaining to admission process will be displayed in the
official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in & www.tnayushselection.org
16. ROUNDS OF ONLINE COUNSELLING
There are four Rounds of counselling
17
1. Round 1
2. Round 2
3. Round 3
4. Stray Round
Online counselling for Round 2 and Stray Round will be done only if there is vacancy
16.1. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR COUNSELLING:
i. Online Processing Fee:
All Candidates should pay a non-refundable amount of Rs.350/- (Three Hundred and Fifty
only) towards online Processing Fee at the time of choice filling.
ii. Tuition Fee:
All Candidates should pay an advance Tuition Fee of Rs.3600/- (Three thousand and six
hundred only) at the time of choice locking. This advance Tuition Fee will be refunded to
those Candidates who have not allotted to any Course or not joined the allotted Course up
to two rounds of counselling.
iii. Counselling Schedule:
The counselling schedule will be published on the official website.
Candidates must register and lock their choices for each round of counselling within the
stipulated dates and time as per the schedule published.
iv. Choice Filling:
Candidates are advised to exercise caution during choice filling and to select preferred
School and Course according to their individual preferences in consultation with parent.
Choices can be edited until they are locked. Once choices are locked, they cannot be
modified under any circumstances.
v. Seat Allotment:
Admission to DIP/DNT Courses will be through online counselling, based on Candidate
rank and as per reservation norms, considering the preferences entered by the Candidate.
vi. Security Guidelines:
Candidates must not share their login credentials (Login ID, Password, OTP) with anyone
to ensure data security and prevent misuse.
vii. Transfers:
Mutual transfers or individual requests for transfer to a particular School will not be
entertained under any circumstances.
viii. Provisional Allotment:
The Candidates who are provisionally selected for DNT Course, should pay an additional
18
advance Tuition Fee of Rs.3600/- (Three thousand six hundred only) at the time of
downloading the allotment order. This advance Tuition Fee will be refunded to those
Candidates who have not joined the allotted Course/ discontinued the Course within the
stipulated date and time up to two rounds of counselling.
Note: The Candidates, who are provisionally selected for DIP Course, need not to pay any
amount to download their allotment order.
Upgrading if seats are vacant:
If a Candidate has selected a particular Course/School in Round 1, he is eligible for Round
2 if any seats are available based on his preference, it will be allotted if he is on merit.
16.2. ROUND 1 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING
a. Candidates should pay a non-refundable amount of Rs.350 (Rupees Three Hundred and
Fifty only) towards online Processing Fee through the online bank payment portal.
b. Candidates who are allotted a seat in Round 1 and not joined/ discontinued from the
Course within the stipulated time will remain eligible to participate in the subsequent
rounds of online counselling for the academic year 2025–2026.
c. Re-allotment is permitted during the Round 2 and Round 3 of counselling based on
rank following the rules of reservation.
d. If a Candidate fails to join the allotted School within the stipulated time after Round 1
allotment, they will still be permitted to participate in Round 2 of online counselling.
16.3. ROUND 2 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING
a. Candidates who had locked their choices in Round-1 and did not get any
seat allotted are not required to lock their choice again. Also, Candidates
who have allotted the seat in Round-1, but not joined in the allotted School
need not lock their choice again. Candidate who has allotted the seat in
Round-1 and joined the School and wish to opt for upgradation need not to
lock their choice again.
b. Fresh choice filling is permitted in this Round for those Candidates who
have not locked their choices in Round-1 (with the payment of Processing
Fee and advance Tuition Fee).
c. Candidate who wishes to retain their seats (who don’t want a change in
School) need not participate in Round-2.
d. If upgraded in Round 2, the Candidate has to relinquish the seat from
Round 1 and join the seat allotted in Round 2 and should not claim his/her
Round 1 seat.
19
e. Candidates should be careful while choice filling and it is advisable to
choose preferred Schools only.
f. Candidates can edit their Choice(s) but once the Candidate locks their
choice(s) during the online counselling, it cannot be changed later.
g. If the Candidate is reallotted in Round 2, then the DIP/DNT seat allotted to
Candidate during Round 1 of Counselling will be allotted to other
Candidate in descending order, not in ascending order.
h. A Candidate who has taken a seat and not joined/ discontinued the Course
within the stipulated time will be eligible to attend the subsequent Rounds
of online counselling (without forfeiture) for the academic year 2025-2026.
i. If the Candidate has joined but discontinued the Course after the stipulated
date and time, he /she will be eligible to attend the Round-3 of online
counselling for the academic year 2025-2026, but he/she will have to
forfeit the online Processing Fee and Tuition Fees paid by him/her during
the Round 1 & 2.
Virtual Vacancies
 If a Candidate allotted a seat in Round 1 and opts for upgradation in Round 2, that
Round 1 seat will be displayed as a virtual vacancy.
 All Candidates will be allowed to fill choices for virtual vacancies during Round 2
choice filling.
 However, such seats will be converted to real vacancies and allotted in Round 2
only if the Candidate from Round 1 vacates or upgrades the seat.
16.4. ROUND - 3 OF ONLINE COUNSELLING:
When a Candidate is scheduled to attend the Round-3 online counselling, then the
Candidate has to pay a non-refundable amount of Rs.350/- (Three hundred and
fifty only) towards the online Processing Fee, via online Bank payment portal.
The Candidates who have already paid the Processing Fees during previous
Rounds of counselling need not pay again if they have not been allotted seats.
16.5. ELIGIBLE CANDIDATES FOR ROUND-3:
a. Candidates who locked their choice in Round-1 or Round-2 and did not get
any seat allotted are not required to lock their choice again.
b. Fresh choice filling is permitted for Round-3 those Candidates who have not
locked their choice in Round-1 or Round-2 (with the payment of online
Processing Fee and advance Tuition Fee).
20
c. If upgraded from Round 2, the Candidate must get relieved from Round-2 seat
and join Round 3 seat.
d. Candidates who joined in Round 3 will not be eligible to participate in the
subsequent rounds for this academic year.
e. Once the Candidate joined the seat allotted in Round 3, he/she cannot upgrade
or discontinue from this seat.
f. If any Candidate does not join the seat allotted in Round 3, he/she will have to
forfeit the online Processing Fee and advance Tuition Fees paid by him/her.
16.6. STRAY ROUND OF COUNSELLING
a. Stray vacancies if arises after the third round of Counselling, Stray Vacancy
counselling will be conducted by the Selection Committee under the direction
of the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy.
b. Fresh registration is allowed in this Stray round. To participate in the Stray
Round, Candidates should pay a non-refundable amount of Rs.350/- (Rupees
Three hundred and fifty only) towards online application fee.
c. At the time of choice filling, all the Candidates should pay non-refundable
online Processing Fee of Rs.350/- (Rupees three hundred and fifty only)
d. At the time of choice locking Candidate should pay advance Tuition Fee of
Rs.3600/- (Rupees three thousand and six hundred only) to participate in stray
round or subsequent round (if any) via online bank payment portal which is
not refundable.
e. Candidates who are not holding any seats in DIP/DNT Courses will be eligible
to participate in this Counselling.
f. Candidates who have joined in DIP/DNT in the previous rounds will not be
eligible to participate in this counselling.
g. If the DNT seat is allocated in Stray Vacancy, the Candidates should pay an
additional advance Tuition Fee of Rs.3600/- (Three thousand six hundred
only) at the time of downloading the allotment order. This advance Tuition
Fee will not be refunded in the event of not joining.
Note: If the DIP seat is allocated in Stray Vacancy, the Candidate, need not to
pay any amount to download their allotment order.
j. If the Candidate fails to download the allotment order or downloaded the
allotment order and fails to join the School within the stipulated date and time
his/her advance Tuition Fees will be forfeited. They also will not be able to
21
participate in DIP/DNT Counselling for subsequent one academic year.
k. If a Candidate joined the School and discontinued the Course, the Candidate
should pay the Discontinuation fee of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten thousands
only) and the paid Tuition Fees will not be refunded.
l. If it is found that a Candidate is/was involved in impersonation / suppression
or misrepresentation of facts and production of falsified / bogus certificates,
his/her provisional allotment order will be cancelled and legal proceedings /
criminal action will be initiated.
17. 17.1. TUITION FEES.
a. For Diploma in Integrated Pharmacy (D.I.P.) Course: Rs.3,600/- (Rupees Three
thousand and six hundred only) per annum.
b. For Diploma in Nursing Therapy (D.N.T) Course: Rs.7,200/- (Rupees Seven
thousand and two hundred only) per annum.
c. The fee mentioned for DIP should be paid at the time of choice locking.
d. The fee mentioned for DNT should be paid at the time of choice locking
(Rs.3600/-) and at the time of downloading the allotment order (Rs.3600/-)
e. The fee mentioned above is subject to modification as per rules in force.
f. Fees once paid will not be refunded under any circumstances from Round 3
onwards. Candidates discontinue the Course after the stipulated date and time
cannot claim for refund of Tuition Fees paid. The Transfer Certificate and Conduct
Certificate will be issued to discontinued Candidates by the Head of Institution
concerned, on receipt of declaration from student and parent that they will not
request for rejoining the Course.
17.2. Fees Details:
Course Fees Time of Payment Mode
Online
D.I.P. Rs.3600/- At the time of choice locking
payment
At the time of choice locking Rs.3600/- Online
(Rupees Three thousand and six hundred payment
D.N.T. Rs.7200/- only) and at the time of downloading the
allotment order Rs.3600/-(Rupees Three
thousand and six hundred only)
Note: * A file regarding increase in the fees for both DIP/DNT Courses to Rs. 8000/-
for the academic year 2025-26 has been sent to Tamil Nadu Government for
approval. Upon the receipt of the approval, the Candidate has to pay the remaining
22
fees to the School of AYUSH Paramedical Courses where he/she is studying.
18. SPECIAL CATEGORIES:
a. Counselling for the Special Categories (Children of Ex-Servicemen, Eminent
Sports Person and Persons with Bench Mark Disabilities except Upper limb, vision
and hearing) will be done ahead of the General Category counseling.
b. All the Candidates who would like to attend the Special Category Counseling
should appear in person along with all the relevant original certificates at the
venue specified in the Website.
c. Seats earmarked for the Special Categories will be allotted following the horizontal
reservation. If sufficient numbers of Candidates are not available for allotment
against any of the Special category seats, the vacant seats will be added to the
General pool of seats and filled up with Candidates from the provisional rank list
duly applying the rule of reservation.
d. Candidates seeking admission against special category seats should submit
necessary certificates obtained from appropriate authorities in the prescribed form
annexed respectively and submit them along with the application to the Selection
Committee.
e. If the required certificates and documents for Special Category are not enclosed,
the Candidate will not be considered under Special Category. In this case, by
default, their candidature will be considered under General Category.
18.1. Seats Reserved for Children of Ex-Servicemen:
Name of the Course Total No. of seats reserved
D.I.P. 2
D.N.T. 1
Note:
a) The Candidates should furnish a certificate as prescribed in the format as in
Annexure-III obtained from the competent authority.
b) The Special Committee from the Defence Authorities constituted for this purpose will
scrutinize certificates submitted by the Candidates. Eligible Candidates will be selected on
merit basis. The other eligibility conditions for admission to D.N.T. Course and D.I.P.
Course will be as applicable in case of General Category.
18.2. Seats reserved for Eminent Sports Person:
Name of the Course Total No. of seats reserved
D.I.P. 1
23
D.N.T. 2
a) Sports quota selection will be done by the Common Committee constituted for this
purpose at Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu. The mode of selection
will be made as per the guidelines prescribed by the competent authority.
b) The Candidates should submit two sets of Self-attested Photostat Copies of
certificates and testimonials of sports evidence along with application (one set
will be transmitted to the Common Committee, Sports Development Authority of
Tamil Nadu) to the Office of the Selection Committee in person on or before the
last date prescribed for submission of application. Scrutiny of the Sports
Certificate will be made by Common Committee at Sports Development
Authority of Tamil Nadu. Decision of the Common Committee shall be final.
c) Candidates are requested to arrange the Certificates in chronological order
starting from June 2021 as given in the Annexure IV (A) and submit along with
the application in person. All the particulars are to be filled up as per the
guidelines given in the Annexure- IV. The other eligibility conditions for
admission to BSMS / BAMS / BUMS / BHMS Courses will be applicable as in
the case of General category. If the Candidate has same sports mark, their cut
off mark will be considered to arrive sports merit list.
18.3. Seats reserved for Persons with Bench Mark Disability
Name of the Course Total No. of seats reserved
D.I.P. 5
D.N.T. 5
a. 5% of the total number of seats available in Government Schools of Paramedical
Courses are reserved for Persons with Bench Mark Disability Candidates.
b. The Candidates seeking admission under this category should furnish a medical
certificate as prescribed in Annexure V obtained from competent authority and also
enclose full size photograph exhibiting the deformity along with the filled in
application. The decision of Selection Committee is final on the eligibility of
Candidate seeking admission under the proviso of Rights of Person with Disability
Act 2016.
c. Candidates are requested to produce a Certificate from the District Medical Board
of the district concerned constituted for this purpose assessing the nature and the
extent of physical disability in the format prescribed in the Annexure –V. The
24
Candidate must have obtained the certificate within 3 months prior to
submission of the application for seeking admission under this category. If the
certificate has been obtained earlier, the application will be rejected. The
Candidates seeking admission under this category should produce the full-size
photograph exhibiting the deformity.
d. The selected Candidates for DIP/DNT Course will be required to undergo second
medical examination by a Medical Board constituted for the purpose by the
Directorate of Medical Education to ascertain and confirm the nature and extent of
physical disability.
e. “Presence of significant Locomotor Disability with or without any other
Significant disability such as visual or hearing–speech or learning etc. which will
make it very difficult for the Candidate to pursue and complete the Course
satisfactorily and may significantly increase the risk to the Candidate or the
patient(s) – may be declared NOT ELIGIBLE for admission”. The decision of the
Commissioner, Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy, in this regard shall be final.
19. DISCONTINUATION FEES:
a) Candidates who discontinue the Course on or after the last cut off date for
admission process for the academic session 2025 -2026 and on any date of the
subsequent year, they shall have to pay a sum of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten
thousand only) as penalty for wasting one seat of that batch by means of Demand
Draft drawn in favour of “The Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy,
Chennai-106” payable at Chennai.
Note: This penalty is only for Candidates who discontinue the Course after the stipulated
date and time and not for re-allotment from one to another category / Course / School.
20. OTHER IMPORTANT INSTRUCTIONS:
20.1. The Selected Candidates should produce all the original documents at the time of
admission to the Nodal Officer of the Government Ayush Paramedical Schools
concerned. Selection will be cancelled if the Candidates do not produce the original
documents at the time of admission.
20.2. Selected Candidates should produce a Physical Fitness Certificate obtained from a
Registered Medical Practitioner not below the rank of Assistant Surgeon or “A” Class
practitioner Registered with Tamil Nadu Board of Indian Medicine or Board of
Integrated Medicine or Tamil Nadu Siddha Medical Council, Chennai or Tamil Nadu
Homoeopathy Medical Council, at the time of joining the Course.
25
20.3 Candidates selected for admission and their parent/guardian will have to sign a discipline
declaration form as mentioned in Annexure – VII and failure to sign the declaration will
result in the cancellation of selection.
20.4. Candidate selected for admission to DNT/D.I.P Courses are NOT guaranteed any
appointment in Government Service.
20.5. Hepatitis-B Vaccination:
All Candidates selected for admission to DIP/DNT Course should take the Hepatitis-B
Vaccine before admission and produce a certificate as in Annexure–VI. The students
should take further doses at the prescribed intervals as required.
20.6. In respect of selected Candidates adequate original documentary evidence shall be required
and verification may also be done to decide on their eligibility under various categories.
20.7. Enquiry or any correspondence regarding the selection of Candidates will not be
entertained.
20.8. Ragging: The Candidates who join the DIP/DNT Courses should not indulge or participate
in any kind of ragging throughout their study period. If they are found to have indulged in
ragging at any time, the Candidate will be removed from the roll of the Institution
regardless of whatever stage of study they are in and criminal action will be taken against
the Candidate.
20.9. If proof of Authenticity of Certificate could not be obtained by the Government Ayush
Paramedical Schools on time, the Candidate will not be allowed to continue the 2nd year
of study.
20.10. Candidates applied for the Diploma Courses 2025 - 2026 session are deemed to have read
the contents in the Prospectus and agreed with all the conditions / clauses and will not have
the right to challenge any of the clauses contained in this Prospectus.
20.11. Students who have 80% of attendance only will be permitted to write Diploma
examinations (DIP/DNT) on completion of each Semester. However, they will be allowed
to appear in supplementary examination. The Candidates who have successfully
completed the Course and the Continuous Internship training will be awarded with
Diploma Certificate.
20.12. Selection for the Course is only provisional. The Selection Committee reserves the rights
to cancel the selection and admission of the Candidates at any time as and when eligibility
conditions are found to be defective in addition to facts suppressed or overlooked.
20.13. Candidates while pursuing the Diploma Course (DIP/DNT), have break the study and such
26
break crossed double the duration of Course for any reason such as marriage, maternity
and on medical grounds will not be allowed to continue the Course. Students who have
not passed their Diploma examination and crossed double the duration of period of Course
of study are permitted to complete their semester examination within a period of 1 year + 1
year grace period totaling 2 years, failing which the Candidate will be discharged from the
concerned Courses of study.
20.14. The Government orders issued and to be issued from time to time pertaining to any of the
matters contained in the Prospectus should be read as part and parcel of this Prospectus and
such Terms and Conditions in the Government Orders are deemed to have been
incorporated in this Prospectus.
20.15. No admission, re-allotment / transfer shall be made after cut-off date for the academic year.
20.16. COVID-19 INSTRUCTION: The special category seats Candidates and their parents are
instructed to follow the standard preventive measures to reduce the risk of COVID-19
during the counselling as per the Government order time to time.
For Commissioner of Indian Medicine
and Homoeopathy.
27
CHECK LIST FOR DIP/DNT COURSES ADMISSION 2025-2026 SESSION
CASE- I : CANDIDATE’S WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU AND STUDIED
SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII- STD IN TAMIL NADU.
CASE- II : CANDIDATE’S WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU BUT STUDIED
SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII- STD PARTLY/ FULLY IN OUTSIDE TAMIL
NADU.
CASE- III : CANDIDATE’S WHO ARE NON- NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU
AND STUDIED SCHOOLING FROM VI TO XII-STD CONTINUOUSLY IN
TAMIL NADU.
CERTIFICATES/ DOCUMENTS CASE-I CASE-II CASE-III
DOCUMENTS OF CANDIDATE’S ARE AS FOLLOWS:
X-Mark Sheet   
XI & XII –Mark Sheets   
Transfer Certificate   
Nativity Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil   
Nadu
Community Certificate from Competent Authority of   
Tamil Nadu (except- OC)
Certificate for Proof of Study from VI Std. to XII Std. in   
Tamil Nadu (From the Head of schools where studied)
Birth Certificate   
Eligibility Certificate obtained from the Tamil Nadu Dr.   
M.G.R. Medical University, Guindy, Chennai for the   
candidates of other Universities / Boards
(Except TN State Board, CBSC and ISCE Board)
Special Category Certificates for Persons with   
Benchmark Disabilities, Eminent Sports Person and Ex-   
Servicemen (if applicable)
Candidate’s Aadhar card   
DOCUMENTS OF PARENTS ARE AS FOLLOWS:
Parent Community Certificate from Competent 
 
Authority of Tamil Nadu (Except- OC)
Income Certificate of parent for the candidates claiming 
 
fee exemption
28
Round Free Exit Resignation Exit with Eligibility for Discontinuation Fees
Forfeiture of Further after Joining
Fees Counselling
Round Allowed Allowed Allowed to Eligible for NIL
1 exit further Before Round 2.
counselling
Round Allowed Allowed only Allowed to Eligible for If the candidates resign
2 Once exit within further before the stipulated
within stipulated time counselling date in Round 2 the
stipulated without candidates will be
time forfeiture allowed free exit.
After the stipulated
date in round 2,
discontinuation fees
will be Rs.10,000/- and
forfeit Advance tuition
fees and tuition fees.
Round Not Not allowed If not joined, Not allowed in After joining the allotted
3 allowed forfeit Advance next round seat of round 3,
tuition fees and discontinuation fees
Tuition fee. will be Rs.10,000/- and
forfeiture of
Advance tuition fees
and tuition fees will
also apply.
Round Not Not allowed If not joined not eligible for After joining the allotted
4 (Stray allowed forfeit Advance next one year. seat of Stray round,
round) tuition fees & discontinuation fees
Tuition fee and will be Rs.10,000/- and
not eligible for forfeiture of Advance
next one year. tuition fees and tuition
fees will also apply.
29
ROUND CANDIDATE FORFEITURE OF FEES ELIGIBILITY
Round 1 If allotted No forfeiture of fees Can participate in round 2 for
and joined re- allotment
If allotted and No forfeiture of fees Can participate in subsequent
not rounds of counseling
joined/Resigned
If not Can participate in subsequent
allotted/not rounds of counseling
choice locked
Round 2 No forfeiture of fees. Allowed to Allowed for further rounds of
If allotted
vacate seat once before the counseling
and joined
stipulated date.
If allotted / No forfeiture of fees Allowed for further rounds of
Re-allotted and counseling
not joined
If not choice
No forfeiture of fees Eligible for round 3
locked
If wants to Forfeiture of advance tuition fee Not eligible for round 3
discontinue and tuition fee, in addition he/she
after the should pay discontinuation fee.
stipulated date
and time
If not allotted Eligible for round 3
Round 3 If allotted Not allowed to vacate seat. Not allowed for further rounds of
and joined If wants to discontinue, then Forfeit counseling
advance tuition fee and tuition fee,
in addition he/she should pay
discontinuation fee.
If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for stray round
Not joined
If not allotted Eligible for stray vacancy
If not choice
Eligible for stray vacancy
locked
Stray Not allowed to vacate seat.
vacanc If wants to discontinue, then forfeit
If allotted
y advance tuition fee and tuition fee,
and joined
in addition he/she should pay Not eligible for next one year.
discontinuation fee.
If allotted and
Forfeit Advance tuition fees Not eligible for next one year.
Not joined
30
Annexure–I
SPECIAL CATEGORIES WITH THEIR CODE NUMBERS
(In respect of the Government School of AYUSH Paramedical Courses only)
Code No. Special Category DIP DNT
01 Children of Ex-Servicemen 2 1
02 Eminent Sportsperson 1 2
03 Persons with Benchmark Disability 5 5
Total 8 8
31
ANNEXURE II
CERTIFICATE OF NATIVITY IN TAMIL NADU
This is to Certify that ………...……………………………………………………… S/o. D/o. W/o.
Thiru…………………………………………………………………………….. an applicant for
admission to Diploma in Integrated Pharmacy (DIP) and Diploma in Nursing Therapist (DNT)
Courses who normally resides at …………………………………………………………………… in
Tamil Nadu, is a Native of Tamil Nadu.
Taluk…………………………………………
District……………………………………….
State………………………………………….
Signature:
Name and Designation:
Office Seal:
Station:
Date:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR NATIVITY CERTIFICATE
1. This Certificate should be issued by an officer of the Revenue Department not below the
rank of Tahsildar in the Taluk concerned.
2. This Certificate should not be issued by the Special Tahsildars, Deputy Tahsildars such as
Loans, Land Acquisition, Election, Excise and HQs, Deputy Tahsildars, Special Deputy
Collectors, Assistant Commissioner of Agricultural Income, Excise, and Elections etc.
3. This Certificate should be signed also by the Village Administrative Officer.
4. The Certificate should bear the stamp of the office of the Officer signing the Certificate.
5. Any foreign national irrespective of the period of study in the State will not become eligible
to apply for this Course. No certificate of Nativity in the State of Tamil Nadu, should
therefore be issued to Nationals of other countries for this purpose.
6. The certifying officers should insist upon clear proof of the Nativity of the Parent or
Guardian of the Candidate and satisfy themselves on the genuineness of the residential
qualification.
7. Permanent Residence Certificate will not be considered as Nativity Certificate.
8. The guidelines prescribed for the issue of Nativity Certificate and they are as follows as per
Letter No. RA.V(B)16932/2000, dated 3-4-2000 of the Special Commissioner and
Commissioner of Revenue Administration, Chepauk, Chennai-5.
32
(i) The parents/guardians of the applicants/students or the applicants themselves should
have permanently resided continuously for a period of five years in Tamil Nadu.
(ii) Permanently residing for a period of five years should be supported by Documentary
evidence.
(iii) The family ration card, Electoral Roll, Census List if taken recently, documents like
sale deed, tax receipt etc. relating to the property owned by either of the parents or by
the applicant may be verified.
(iv) The Transfer Certificate issued by the School authorities where the applicant had
studied last may be verified to know whether he was in the State for five years.
(v) Enquiry in the village / place of residence of the neighbor / Village Administrative
Officers regarding continuous residing.
(vi) To ensure that wrong or incorrect address had not been furnished to obtain the
certificate.
(vii) The birth place, the present place of residence of the parent / father, Permanent assets,
mother tongue, place of education, place of marriage of the applicant / parents, the
period of stay in and outside Tamil Nadu can also be considered before issuing
certificate.
33
Annexure-III
Certificate of Department of Ex-Servicemen’s Welfare
(Website:www.esmwel.tn.gov.in)
Pensioner / Non-Pensioner / Family Pensioner Identity Card no. < I Card No>
Mobile No: <mobile No> E-mail ID - <email id>
Name of the Applicant: <Name of the applicant> Application No. ……………….
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY / ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EX-SERVICEMEN’S WELFARE,
<DIST> CERTIFICATE OF DEPENDENCY ON EX-SERVICEMEN
Academic Year 2025 -2026
No. <dist code / Year / Stream / Sl.no> Dated: <date>
This is to certify that Selvan/Selvi/Thiru/ Tmt <Name of the applicant> is the
<relationship> of and is solely dependent on the Ex-Servicemen whose particulars are
furnished below.
He / She is eligible for consideration for admission to professional / Academic /
Technical / Law / Others (specify) Courses in <Stream> against the reservation of seats for:
(i) Children of Ex-Servicemen
(ii) Children of Ex-Servicemen died / disabled in war / peace time
(iii) Wife / Widow of Ex-Servicemen (Tick the relevant box)
Signature :
Signature of the Candidate: Designation:
34
SERVICE PARTICULARS OF EX-SERVICEMAN
Regimental No. : <Service No>
Name : <name>
Rank : <rank>
Regiment / Corps : <Regiment / Crops>
Date of enrolment : <DOE>
Date of discharge / death : <DOD>
Cause of discharge : <cause of Discharge>
Whether died / disabled in war / peace :
Operation in which Martyred / Disable :
(If applicable)
Character assessed at the time of discharge : <Character>
Office Seal:
Station: <Office of DD / AD ESM Welfare, Signature
<Dist> Date: Designation:
Note: This Certificate shall be issued by an Officer of the Department of Ex-Servicemen’s
Welfare of Tamil Nadu not below the rank of Assistant Director of Ex-Servicemen’s Welfare
Board of the District in which the dependent is a NATIVE. This reservation is applicable only
to Tamil Nadu Native Candidates.
35
ANNEXURE IV
SELECTION OF CANDIDATES UNDER QUOTA FOR EMINENT SPORTS
PERSONS FOR 2025-2026 SESSION
1. The purpose of this quota is to recognize and give weightage to the sports eminence
of the candidates and hence marks for sports achievements alone will be considered
in ranking the candidates. The candidates are expected to continue their good
performance in sports, even after admission.
2. The candidate shall submit all the sports certificates along with participation
certificates and relevant forms, issued by Association / Recognized Federation, but
only one highest achievement in a tournament (among the International, National,
State, Regional and District) in an academic year in the sports disciplines listed in
3. TSaeblelect iVoInI woifl l tbhee ccoannsdidideareted wfoirll abwea rbdainsge dm oanrk sth. e marks obtained by the candidate
strictly following the guidelines, given in the tables.
Table IV(I) - Marks for Recognized International Achievement
Sl. Competition Gold Silver Bronze Participation
No.
1. International (Representing India 1000 850 650 400
Category–IA, IB) – Once in 4 years
2. International (Representing India 500 450 400 250
Category–II) – Once in 2 years
3. International (Representing India 400 350 300 200
Category–III) – Every year
36
Table IV(II) - Marks for Recognized National Achievement
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No.
Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. National Championships /
National games – Organized by
190 160 130 100
National Federations / IOA
2. School Games Federation of India
190 160 130 100
(SGFI) National Level Competition
3. Khelo India Youth Games -
190 160 130 100
National Level
Table IV(III) - Marks for Recognized State Championship and State Competition
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No.
Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. State Championship
Representing Revenue District –
95 80 65 45
Organized by State Associations
2. Bharathiar Day Sports Meet
95 80 65 45
(State Level)
3. Republic Day Sports Meet (State
95 80 65 45
Level)
4. KVS / CBSE / CISCE (ISCE)
95 80 65 45
Board National Sports Meet
5. SDAT State Level Chief
95 80 65 45
Minister’s Trophy for Sports
37
and Games
Table IV(IV) – Marks for Recognized Regional Level Achievements
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No.
Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. KVS / CBSE / CISCE (ISCE) 60 45 30 10
Board National Sports Meet
(Regional Level)
Table IV(V) – Marks for recognized District Level Achievements
Sl. Competition Allocation of Marks
No.
Gold Silver Bronze Participation
1. District Tournaments / Sports Meet 45 30 15 5
/ Championships conducted by
District Sports Associations
(recognized by SDAT/TNOA)
2. District / Education District Inter 45 30 15 5
School Competition (District Level)
3. SDAT - District Level Chief 45 30 15 5
Minister’s Trophy for Sports and
Games
4. (a) GUIDELINES FOR INTERNATIONAL TOURNAMENTS:
CATEGORY – I:
 (I - A) Olympic Games (Summer / Winter), Youth Olympic Games (Summer /
Winter), Commonwealth Games and Asian Games (Games organized in 4
years frequency by the International Olympic Committee).
 (I - B) World Championship, Commonwealth championship, World Cup-
(organized in 4 Years frequency by the International Sports Federations).
38
 Eligibility for athletes requires participation in an event involving at least
seven different countries and such competitions should have been approved
by Indian Olympics Association (IOA), Sports Authority of India (SAI) and
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS).
CATEGORY – II:
 World Championship, World cup, Asian Championship, SAF Games (South
Asian Games), Commonwealth championship Organized in 2 years
frequency by the International Sports Federation.
 Eligibility for athletes requires participation in an event involving at least
seven different countries and such competitions should have been
approved by Indian Olympics Association (IOA), Sports Authority of India
(SAI) and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS).
 Open or Invitational or Memorial or any indifferent nomenclature or title of
tournaments or Championships at International level, not approved by any
of the above authority will not be considered for marks.
CATEGORY – III:
 Asian Championships, Commonwealth Games, World cup, World
Championship, Grand Prix, Grand slam - Organized in Every year by the
International Sports Federation.
 Eligibility for athletes requires participation in an event involving at least
seven different countries and such competitions should have been approved
by Indian Olympics Association (IOA), Sports Authority of India (SAI) and
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS) Government of India.
1. Participation or achievement in International tournaments will be considered
only with earlier achievements at National and State level tournaments.
Direct participation / Selection trials / Camps any International or National
tournaments will not be considered for award of marks.
2. The highest achievement in only one annual regular tournament, officially
conducted in a regular manner by the member National Olympic Committee
(NOCs) authorized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) or
International Sports Federations affiliated to the IOC will be considered for
award of marks. The players /s ports persons representing the Country in
such tournaments through Indian Olympic Association (IA) or respective
National Sports Federations recognized by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
39
Sports, Government of India or IOA will be considered for award of marks in
each year.
3. Only tournaments officially recognized by the Indian Olympic Association /
respective official National Sports Federations Recognized by MAYS will be
considered for the award of marks (for each year) from 01.06.2021 to
31.05.2022, 01.06.2022 to 31.05.20223, 01.06.2023 to 31.05.2024 and
01.06.2024 to 31.05.2025.
4. Certificates of Participation or Achievements in tournaments, submitted
along with Form I alone are eligible for marks indicated in Table (I) above
(should be submitted before the last date for submission of application).
5. Players who participated in any of the categories I, II and III, in Table(I)
should produce the copies of the following: -
i. VISA, Immigration entry in passport, clearance from Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports (Government of India), Indian Olympic Association
and respective National Sports Federations including BCCI.
ii. The fixture, draw, schedule of events, players' accreditation, National
Medal, Merit, Diploma, Participation certificate and Form-I issued by the
respective National Sports Federation and certificates signed and
issued in the prescribed format by the President or Secretary General
of the National Olympic Committee of the Organizing Country and
International Sports Federation.
4. (b) FOR NATIONAL TOURNAMENTS:
1. National tournaments should have been officially be recognized as the
regular annual championship / tournament by MYAS or IOA or SAI or SDAT
or SGFI Nationals conducted every year by school education department in
age groups (U-14, U-17, U-19) or respective official National Sports
Federation will be considered (for each year) for the award of marks.
2. Marks will not be awarded for selection trials and coaching camps.
3. Tournaments conducted by the Federations which are not recognized by
the IOA or MYAS, TNOA or SDAT at National level for a particular period
will not be considered for award of marks.
4. Candidates must have participated at Zonal Cluster, District, Regional,
State, National and International in a particular Game/Sport in the same
hierarchical order as per the existing norms applicable for a particular
40
Game/Sports.
4. (c) FOR STATE TOURNAMENTS:
1. State level tournaments should officially be recognized as the regular annual
championship or tournament by respective official State Association or SAI or
SDAT or School Education Department of Tamil Nadu will be considered (for
each year) for the award of marks.
2. Marks will not be awarded for selection trials and coaching camps.
3. Any tournaments conducted by the Association which are de-recognized by
the SDAT at State level for a particular period will not be considered for award
of marks. (Refer Recognized Association list attached in ANNEXURE VI).
4. (d) FOR TAMIL NADU BOARD CBSE/KV SCHOOLS / CISCE - SPORTS
ACHIEVEMENTS:
1. Tamil Nadu Board schools, KV / CISCE and CBSE Schools, School Zonal
and School cluster level achievements will not be considered.
2. The candidates participated in the tournament conducted by CBSE and KV
Schools, at Regional / South Zone are equated to Regional Level
Achievements and the National Level Achievements are equated to State
level of State / Matric Board Schools.
5. GENERAL CONDITIONS:
1. For consideration of candidates seeking admission under the category of
eminent sports person, he/she should enclose all the attested photo copies
of participation certificates and the relevant forms issued by the competent
sports authorities. The application along with all the sports certificates
/relevant forms/documents as given in 4(a) 5, should be presented for
certificate verification which will be done at Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Arumbakkam,
Chennai- 600 106.
2. Participation / achievements in each academic year from 01.06.2021 to
31.05.2022, 01.06.2022 to 31.05.2023, 01.06.2023 to 31.05.2024 and
01.06.2024 to 31.05.2025 in sports / games shown in the list alone will be
considered for the award of marks. National or State Level Championships
or Tournaments conducted by Sports Federations or Associations
recognized by MYAS or IOA or SDAT or TNOA alone will be considered for
41
the award of marks. (Recognition of State Associations / National
Federations should be relevant to the year concerned).
3. Relevant attested copies of certificates issued by the competent authorities
as detailed below are to be submitted along with the application before the
last date for receiving the applications.
4. Open or Invitational or Memorial or any indifferent nomenclature or title of
tournaments or Championships at District or State or National or
International level will not be considered for marks.
5. District or Inter-District Championship means the championships conducted
by the respective recognized District or State Sports Association for the
State of Tamil Nadu.
6. Direct participation or achievement at any level without participating in the
qualifying level competitions such as District or State or National or direct
selection conducted by District or State Sports Association or National
Sports Federation to represent the District or State or National or
International tournaments or championships will not be considered for
award of marks.
7. For International achievements in Tennis, marks for Gold, Silver and Bronze
will be awarded to players who are ranked first, second and third
respectively in the ATP or WTA rankings of International Tennis Federation
for awarding participation marks for the top 5 ranked players will be
considered from the ATP or WTA list published by the International Tennis
Federation. Necessary document and proof should be enclosed by the
candidate for National or State level achievement in Tennis, marks for Gold,
Silver and Bronze will be awarded to players who are ranked first, second
and third respectively in the AITA or TNTA at National or State for awarding
participation mark the top 5 ranked players will be considered from the list
published by AITA or TNTA at National or State level based on the ranking.
Necessary documents and proof should be enclosed by the candidate.
8. Certificates should be in printed form and necessary Form-I and II should
be in prescribed format. (Certificates or forms issued in letter pads will be
invalid).
9. All other sport disciplines in which ranking is the criteria for assessment of
achievement, rules indicated in item 8 above will be applicable for the
award of marks.
42
10. For Cricket, the annual official Championships or tournaments
conducted within the country under the auspices of TNCA or BCCI at
District or State or National Level alone will be taken into consideration for
that year.
11. Multiple events in a particular sport must be standardized events and in
accordance with the events organized by the approved International
Federations. Events newly created and not in accordance with the
requirement will not be considered for award of marks.
12. Participation or achievements of candidates with nativity of Tamil Nadu
who represented Tamil Nadu alone are eligible for marks under National
Category.
13. Only Tamil Nadu candidates are eligible to apply for admission under
Sports Quota and only the KVS and CBSE schools within Tamil Nadu are
eligible for marks.
14. A Common Committee for Engineering and Medicine constituted for this
purpose will rank the candidates based on the marks assigned to the
certificates enclosed along with the application. Candidates with a minimum
sports mark of 5 and above alone will be considered for ranking.
15. All the achievement certificates are to be supported necessarily by the
relevant participation certificates and appropriate forms.
16. No further enclosures or certificates will be entertained after the last date
for submission of completed application in person.
17. Highest achievement or participation certificates obtained by candidates
at different levels such as District or State or National or International in
each year along with earlier achievements should be enclosed without fail.
(A candidate shall enclose a copy of all eligible certificates for scrutiny).
18. Candidates in proportion to the available seats will be called to appear
before the Common Committee for Engineering or Medicine for verification
of the Originals, followed by counseling after ranking.
19. If any candidate fails to produce the requisite Original Certificates or
Forms, his/her place will be allotted to the candidate next in rank and so on.
The consequential vacancy at the end of the rank list will be filled up from
among the additional candidates according to their ranks.
43
20. All the highest level of participation or achievement should be supported
by earlier achievements at all levels of competition.
21. Short listed candidates will be called for counselling based on their rank
and branches and Colleges will be allotted according to their choices from
the number of seats reserved under sports quota based. Sports quota
counselling will be held before the commencement of general counselling.
22. Candidates securing admissions under Eminent Sports Persons quota
should sign an undertaking at the time of receiving allotment order assuring
participation in sports activities in the College preferred by them.
23. Legal action would be taken on parents and candidates for furnishing
bogus documents. They should ensure that the certificates obtained are
from competent authorities.
24. A candidate can utilize the Sports Quota only once for Engineering or
Medicine.
25. List of Games and sports decided by the Concern University.
TABLE IV(VI) - Competent authority to issue Forms / Certificates
Category Competent Authority Form /
Certificate
International President / Secretary of the National
(Representing Nation) Sports Federation (recognized by Ministry
of Youth Affairs and Sports / IOA) Certificate and
Participation certificate / Diploma should Form – I
be signed by the President / Secretary
General / Chairman of the organizing
Committee of the host Nation.
National Championship Member Secretary, SDAT or Secretary of the Certificate and
(Representing Tamil Nadu State Association (recognized both by SDAT Form – II
State) and TNOA)
National Games President or Secretary of IOA and Chairman Certificate and
(Representing Tamil Nadu of the organizing committee Form – II
State)
National Chief Inspector of Physical Education for Certificate and
44
(Representing State) National School Games competitions Form – IV
School Games President / Hon. Gen. Secretary, SGFI Certificates
Federation of India and Forms
(SGFI) (National Level)
KVS Nationals (State Level) Commissioner or Joint Commissioner or Certificates
KVS
CISCE (ISCE) Nationals Deputy Secretary or Chairman of Counsel Certificates
for Indian School Certificate Examination
(CISCE)
CM Trophy Member Secretary, Sports Development Certificates
(State Level) Authority of Tamil Nadu
SDAT approved State level Member Secretary, Sports Development Certificates
tournaments Authority of Tamil Nadu
CBSE National Sports Meet A. E. O. – Sports / Secretary, CBSE Certificates
(State Level)
Bharathiar Day Sports Meet District Inspector of Physical Education and Certificates
(State Level) Chief Inspector of Physical Education
Republic Day Sports Meet District Inspector of Physical Education and Certificates
(State Level) Chief Inspector of Physical Education
KVS Regional Level Assistant Commissioner of KVS Certificates
(Divisional Level)
CBSE South Zone Sports A.E.O. – Sports / Secretary, CBSE Certificates
Meet (Divisional Level)
District Inter School District Inspector of Physical Education – Certificates
Competitions (District Level) DIPE and District Education Officer
45
Table-IV(VII): Sports Quota–2025–List of Sports Disciplines
1. Athletics 29. Powerlifting
2. Atya Patya 30. Roller Skating
3. Badminton 31. Rowing
4. Ball Badminton 32. Rugby
5. Baseball 33. Sailing
6. Basketball 34. Sepak Takraw
7. Beach Volley ball 35. Shooting
8. Billiards and Snookers 36. Silambam
9. Body Building 37. Soft Ball
10. Boxing 38. Squash Rackets
11. Carrom 39. Swimming
12. Chess 40. Table Tennis
13. Cricket 41. Taek–won–do
14. Cycling 42. Tennikoit
15. Fencing 43. Tennis
16. Football 44. Throwball
17. Golf 45. Triathlon
18. Gymnastics 46. Volleyball
19. Handball 47. Weightlifting
20. Hockey 48. Wrestling
21. Judo 49. Wushu
22. Kabaddi 50. Yachting
23. Karate–Do 51. Yogasanas
24. Kho – Kho 52. Cycle Polo
25. Korf Ball 53. Archery
26. Mallakhamb 54. Soft Tennis
27. Motor Sports 55. Canoeing & Kayaking
28. Netball 56. Roll Ball
46
ANNEXURE – IV (A)
DECLARATION OF THE CANDIDATE FOR SPORTS QUOTA
Name of the candidate:
Registration Number :
(Plus Two / Equivalent Examination)
Details of sports certificates enclosed*
47
raeY
cimedacA
/
lanoitanretnI
/ etatS
/ lanoitaN
/
lanoisiviD tcirtsiD
eht
fo
emaN
teem
stropS
enilpicsid
stropS
enuJ(
raeY
&
htnoM
5202
yaM
ot
1202
VI/II/
smroF
tnaveleR
)oN/seY(
desolcne
Eligible Marks
Total
Marks
dloG
)I(
revliS
)II(
eznorB
)III(
noitapicitraP
2024-2025
(XII Std.)
2023-2024
(XI Std.)
2022-2023 (X
Std.)
2021-2022
(IX Std.)
Total No. of Grand
Certificates Total
enclosed
* Highest achievement/participation certificates obtained by candidate at different levels
such as district/State/National/International in each year along with earlier achievements
should be enclosed without fail. Nothing prevents a candidate enclosing all eligible
certificates for scrutiny but may be arranged as per the serial number starting from June
2021 and submitted along with the application.
DECLARATION
The information furnished above and all the enclosures submitted by me are true. Should it
however be found that any information furnished therein is untrue with respect to sports
details, I realize that I am liable for criminal prosecution and I also agree to the forfeiture of
my seat under sports quota.
Signature of the Parent Signature of the
Candidate
Date: Date:
Annexure – V
CERTIFICATE OF DISABILITY
(As per GoI Gazette Notification No.93, dated: 16.02.2022),
(For admission to DIP/DNT Courses)
Recent
Certificate No………………….. Date………………
Passport Size
Name of the Designated Disability Centre (as per annexure):
Photograph of
the candidate
duly attested by
This is to certify that / Mr. / Ms. /
the issuing
……………………….………………………. aged …………………. Years, authority.
Son / Daughter of Thiru………………………………………. Residing at
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
has the following Disability (Name of the Specified Disability)
………………………………………………… (in percentage) of ….…………………… (in
words) ……………………….. (in figure) ………………………………………………………...
a. Please tick on the “Specified Disability”
(Assessment may be done on the basis of Gazette of India. Extra ordinary, Part-III, Section
4) similar to MCI notification.
Sl. No. Disability Type of Specified Disability Range
Category Disabilities Disability (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) Eligible for Eligible for Not Eligible
DIP/DNT DIP/DNT for
Programme, Programme, Programme
Not Eligible Eligible for PwD
for PwD Quota
Quota
1. Physical (A) (a) Leprosy Less than 40-80% disability More than
Disability Locomotor cured person* 40% Persons with 80%
Disability, (b) Cerebral disability more than 80%
including Palsy** disability may
Specified (c) Dwarfism also be allowed
Disabilities (a (d) Muscular on case to case
to f). Dystrophy basis and their
48
(e) Acid attack function a
victims incompetency
(f) Other* will the aid of
** such as assistive devices,
Amputation, if it is being used,
Poliomyelitis, etc. to see if its is
brought below
80% and whether
they possess
sufficient
motor ability as
required to pursue
and complete the
programme
satisfactorily.
* Attention should be paid to loss of sensations in fingers and
hands, amputation, as well as involvement of eyes and
corresponding recommendations be looked at.
** Attention should be paid to impairment of vision, hearing,
cognitive function etc. and corresponding recommendations be
looked at.
*** Both hands intact, with intact sensations, sufficient
strength and range of motion are essential to be considered
eligible for DIP/ DNT programme.
(B) Visual (a) Blindness Less than Equal to or
Impairment 40% More than
(*) (b) Low vision disability 40%
(i.e. Disability
Category ‘0 (i.e.
(10%)’ I Category III
(20%)’ and above)
& II (30%)
(C) Hearing (a) Deaf Less than Equal to or
Impairment (b) Hard of 40% more than
49
@ hearing Disability 40%
Disability
(*) Persons with Visual impairment/ visual disability of more than
40% may be made eligible to pursue DIP/DNT. Education and
may be given reservation, subject to the condition that the visual
disability is brought to a level of less than the bench mark of 40%
with advanced low vision aids such as telescopes / magnifier etc.
@ Persons with hearing disability of more than 40% may e made
eligible to pursue DIP/DNT. Education and may be given
reservation, subject to the condition that the hearing disability is
brought to a level of less than the bench mark of 40% with the aid
of assistive devices.
In addition to this, the individual should have a speech
discrimination score of more than 60%.
(D) Speech & Organic/ Less than Equal to or
language neurological 40% more than
disability causes Disability 40%
Disability
It is proposed that for admission to DIP/DNT programme the Speech
Intelligibility Affected (SIA) score shall not exceed 3 (Which will correspond
to less than 40%) to be eligible to pursue the DIP/DNT programme. The
individuals beyond this score will not be eligible for admission to the DIP/DNT
programme.
Persons with an Aphasia Quotient (AQ) up to 40% may be eligible to pursue
DIP/DNT. programme but beyond that they will neither be eligible to pursue
the DIP/DNT. programme nor will they have any reservation.
2. Intellectual (a) Specific # currently there is no Quantification scale
disability learning available to assess the severity of SpLD,
disabilities therefore the cut-off of 40% is arbitrary and
(Perceptual more evidence is needed.
disabilities, Less than Equal to or more
Dyslexia, 40% than 40%
Dyscalculia, Disability disability But
Dyspraxia & selection will be
50
Developmental based on the
aphasia)# learning
competency
evaluated with the
help of the
remediation /
assisted
technology / aids /
infrast ructural
changes by
the Expert Panel.
(b) Autism Absence Currently not Equal to or
spectrum o recommended due more than
disorders r Mild to lack of 60%
Disability, objective method disability
Asperser to establish or presence
syndrome presence and of cognitive
(disability extent of mental /intellectual
of 40-60% illness. disability
a However, the and or if the
s benefit of person is
per ISAA) reservation/quota deemed
where the may be unfit for
individual considered in pursuing
is deemed future after DIP/DNT
fit for developing better programme
DIP/DNT methods of by an expert
programme disability panel.
by an assessment.
expert
panel
3. Mental Mental illness Absence or Currently not Equal to or
Behaviour mild recommended more than
51
Disability: due to lack of 40%
less than objective method disability or
40% to establish if the person
(under presence and is deemed
IDEAS) extent of mental unfit to
illness. perform
However, the hi/her
benefit of duties.
reservation/quota Standards
may be may be
considered in drafted for
future after the definite
developing better of “fitness
methods of to practice
disability medicine”
assessment. as are used
by several
institutions
of countries
other than
India.
4. Disability (a) Chronic (i) Multiple Less than 40%80% More than
caused due Neurological Sclerosis 40% disability 80%
to Conditions Disability
(ii) Parkinsonism
(b) Blood (i) Haemophilia Less than 40%80% More than
Disorder 40% disability 80%
s (ii) Thalassemia Disability
(iv) sickle cell
disease
5. Multiple More than one of Must consider all above while deciding in
disabilities the above individual cases recommendations with respect
including specified to presence any of the above, namely, visual,
52
deaf disabilities Hearing, Speech & Language disability,
blindness Intellectual Disability, and Mental Illness as a
component of Multiple Disability.
Combining formula as notified by the related
Gazette Notification issued by the Government.
of India
a+b (90-a)
90
(where a=higher value of disability % and
b=lower value of disability % as calculated for
different disabilities) Is recommended for
computing the disability arising when more
than one disabling condition is present in a
given individual. This formula may be used in
cases with multiple disabilities, and
recommendations regarding admission and/or
reservation made as per the specific disabilities
present in a given individual
Note:
For selection under PwD category, Candidates will be required to produce Disability Certificate
before their schedule date of counselling from one of the disability assessment boards as
designated by concerned Authority of Government of India.
i. Conclusion: He/She is Eligible/Not Eligible for admission in Indian Medicine
Courses as per the CCIM Gazette Notification subject to his being otherwise
medically fit.
ii. Functional competency with the aid of Assistive devices in case of
Locomotor*/Visual*/Hearing* Impairment, if any
Sign. & Name Sign. & Name Sign. & Name
(Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist)
Note:
53
1. The selected Candidates have to undergo a second medical examination by a medical
board constituted for the purpose by the Director of Medical Education to ascertain
and confirm the nature and extent of physically disability.
2. The decision of the Commissioner of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy in this regard
will be final.
54
Annexure - VI
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE FOR ADMINISTRATION OF HEPATITIS-B VACCINATION
I, Dr………………………………. Registration No… ........................ certify that I have this
day……………. Of …………… 2025 administered the Hepatitis-B Vaccine to the
Candidate whose particulars are given below:
1. Name of the Candidate
2. Father’s Name
3. Sex
4. Age
5. Identification marks:
I.
II.
6. DOSE I / II / III
Signature of the Applicant Signature of Medical Officer
Name and Designation
Place:
Date: Office Seal
55
Annexure- VII
Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent/Guardian
(This should not be enclosed with the application but should be submitted only at the time of
admission)
I/WE do hereby solemnly and sincerely affirm
1. That the statements made and information furnished in the application submitted and also
in all the enclosures there to submitted by him/her are true. Should it however be found that
any information furnished therein is untrue in material particulars, I/We realize that he/she
is liable for criminal prosecution and forfeiture of his / her seat in the Institution allotted
during the counselling.
2. That my son/daughter/ward would conform strictly to all the rules and regulations
prescribed by the Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai in
force now or which may be introduced in the School hereafter and that I/We realize that
breach of discipline and rules on my son’s/daughter’s/ ward’s part would entail forfeiture
of his/her seat in the School.
3. That my son/daughter/ward shall not make any claim for admission to a particular School
as a matter of right during allotment/Re-allotment.
4. That my son/daughter/ward agrees to pay any amount that may be become due as and when
the fee structure is revised as may be decided by Government of Tamil Nadu/Committee
appointed by the Government for the purpose.
5. That my son/daughter/ward do hereby agree to conform to follow the rules and regulations
laid down or to be laid down by the School for due maintenance of discipline at the said
School and assure that he/she will not join any agitation /strike of any kind during Course
of study and further agree to make good when called upon to do so to the Government of
Tamil Nadu any damage to furniture, apparatus or other articles which may be caused by
any carelessness negligence and want only on his/her part.
6. That my son/daughter/ward who is a Native of Tamil Nadu and will not claim dual
Nativity in future.
7. .............................................................. That my son/daughter/ward hereby declare that
he/she belongs to ……………. Community (Sub caste ) and is fully aware the
producing a false Community certificate leads to expulsion from any Course of study at
any time besides initiation of criminal action against him/her as per law.
56
8. That we are fully aware, as per the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and
Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Ragging Act,1997, Ragging is an offence, and is banned in the
Institution and anyone indulging in ragging is liable to be punished by expulsion from the
Institution and /or rigorous imprisonment up to 3 years, and /or fine up to Rs.25,000/-
Signature of Candidate
Signature of the Parent/Guardian
Place: Date:
57
ANNEXURE – VIII- A
UNDERTAKING REGARDING AUTHORISATION
I,………………………………………………………………………………
Son / daughter of Thiru ................................................................................................... aged
……………………… years AR number ………………………….. and General Rank
……………………… in the Rank list for DIP/DNT 2025 -2026 session do hereby solemnly
affirm and undertake that the decision of my authorized representative, Thiru / Tmt /
Selvi…………………………………………………..………… Son / Daughter / W ife of
……………………………………. Thiru ……………………… aged …………. years,
regarding selection / rejection of seat on the date of counseling (……………..) shall be
binding on me and I shall not have any claim whatsoever, other than the decision taken by
my authorized representative on my behalf on……………………………………………
Signature of the Candidate
Name…………………………………… AR No……………………….
Address………………………………... General Rank…………………
58
ANNEXURE- VIII-B
AUTHORISATION LETTER
I, ………………………………………………………………………. son / daughter of Thiru
…………………………………………………………... bearing AR number
………………………….. and General Rank ……………….. in the provisional rank list for
DIP/DNT Course 2025- 2026 session do hereby authorize, Thiru/ Tmt/Selvi
…………………………….………. Son / Daughter of ……………………………………………
Thiru ……………………………… to represent me on ……………………………………………
before the Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy, Chennai
for allotment of a seat in DIP/ DNT Courses 2025 - 2026 session.
The signature and the photograph of the above-named Thiru / Tmt / Selvi:
………………………………………. are attested below.
Photograph of Candidate Name:
Signature of the Candidate: Application Number:
General Rank in the
Rank List:
59
Photograph of authorized Signature of authorized
Representative attested by Representative duly the
Candidate the Candidate attested by
60
ANNEXURE-IX
DECLARATION BY THE APPLICANT AND PARENT
(to be submitted at the time of admission)
The information furnished above is true and correct. The original certificates will be
produced at the time of Counselling and admission or on demand. In case, any information
furnished above is found to be incorrect, we agree to forego the claim for admission besides
making us liable for criminal prosecution.
Signature of Parent / Guardian. Signature of Applicant.
Date:
61
ANNEXURE – X
FAQ’S REGARDING COUNSELLING PROCESS
Q.No.1: How to apply for Ayush Paramedical Courses admission in Tamil Nadu?
Ans: After the HSC 2025 results are out, there will be notification in the websites
www.tnayushselection.org, www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in for application to Ayush
Paramedical Courses admission in Tamil Nadu. Candidates are advised to Register
them to create User Name and Password after that login using their User Name and
Password. Candidates are advised to read this prospectus carefully and apply
through the website in Online mode only.
Note: Cost of applying online: Rs.350/- (SC/SCA/ST candidates are exempted)
Q.No. 2: I have applied online. Is this enough for getting a seat?
Ans: No. Applying online is just the first stage in the entire process. Once all the
applications are received and scrutinized Eligible Merit List of Candidates
(Candidates who have applied and are found eligible) will be published in the
websites. After this Candidates have to register for the counselling process as
mentioned in the scheme of counselling.
Q. No. 3: How do I register for the counselling?
Ans.: After the Merit List is published candidates have to register before the onset of
counselling by paying the non-refundable online Processing Fee of Rs.350/- in the
website after logging in using the same credentials (User Name, Password) used
during the application process. Registration is allowed before Round 1, Round 3 and
Stray Round and Fresh registration is not allowed before Round 2 (as this is a re-
allottment Round)
Note: Counselling Registration is allowed only for already applied candidates who are
in the Eligible Merit list and not for those candidates who have not at all applied to
Ayush Paramedical Courses.
Q. No. 4: How and when I had to make the payment?
Ans: After completion of Choice filling, payment page appears automatically. Candidate
can do online payment by Net Banking / Credit card/ Debit card. Only after the
successful payment, candidate can submit their choice filling.
Q. No. 5: Is there any restriction for filling up number of choices of Institution (School) in
choice filling form?
Ans: No, you can give as many choices as you wish during online choice filling. However,
choices should be in order of your preference. There will be a common software for
62
seats for filling up of choices. The choices will be available based on your eligibility
and application.
Q. No.6: Is it necessary to fill up the choices and lock the choices to get seat allotted? Or I
will be allotted seat automatically from leftover seats?
Ans: After online registration (registration is compulsory to take part in online allotment
process, before the counselling Rounds during specified registration period), you
have to fill in choice of Institution/School/Course in order of your preference. Once
choice is filled in, it can be modified before locking it. If candidate does not lock the
choice submitted by him/her, the choices already filled will be automatically locked as
per counselling schedule.
Note: If the candidate does not fill choices for any Government Paramedical Ayush
Schools, will not be allotted any seat during the counselling
IMPORTANT:
Don’t wait till the last minute to Register and Lock your choices. Please go through
your submitted choices before locking, as once you lock the choices they cannot be
modified or changed even if you have made a mistake. It may result in allotment of a
seat which you never wanted. (Please note that the choices once locked cannot be
unlocked even by the Selection Committee)
Q. No. 7: Is it necessary to join allotted Government Paramedical Ayush School of Round 1
to get chance to participate in Round 2?
Ans: No, candidates need not report or join the allotted Government Paramedical Ayush
School of Round 1 since there is free exit.
However, if they want to retain the Round 1 seat and upgrade in Round 2 they have
to physically join the Government Paramedical Ayush School of Round 1 and
participate in Round 2 online.
Q. No. 8: Can a candidate participate in Round 2 without submitting fresh choices (based on
choices submitted before Round-1)?
Ans: Fresh choice submission by eligible candidates, as mentioned above is necessary for
consideration for seat allotment during any Round. If candidate does not submit fresh
choice(s) during choice filling period, the candidate will not be considered for
allotment of seat during Round- 2 and will retain the already joined seat, if any
Q. No.9: If I opt to participate in Round 2 of counselling whether my allotted seat
(of Round 1) will be cancelled?
63
Ans: In case you are not allotted any seat in the Round 2, you will retain earlier allotted
seat in Round 1 if you had joined already. However, on re-allotment of a seat in
Round 2, the earlier allotted seat in Round 1 will automatically be cancelled and
allotted to another candidate. Therefore, you are advised to fill in only choices which
you prefer over the earlier allotted seat, for Round 2.
Q. No. 10: - What is the procedure for Round 3 Counselling which will be conducted by
Tamil Nadu AYUSH Selection Committee for Ayush Paramedical Courses?
Ans. Since reallotment is allowed in Round-3, The net vacant seats due to Not allotted /
non joining, non-reporting of Round 2 and any converted seats due to lack of
candidates in the particular quota and the virtual vacancies will be published in the
seat matrix and eligible candidates have to submit fresh choices and the result will
be processed as per Choice & Merit applying the rule of Reservation.
Q. No. 12: How much time will I be given to join the allotted School?
Ans: Candidates allotted seats will be required to join the allotted School / Course within
the stipulated time which is mentioned in counselling schedule. However, candidates
are advised to join as early as possible and not to wait for last day of joining, due to
different schedule of holiday (including local holidays) / working hours in various
Ayush Paramedical Schools. Therefore, candidates are advised to contact allotted
School immediately after declaration of result of counselling allotment process, to
know the details. If candidate fails to join the allotted School within stipulated time,
then the allotted seat will be cancelled. For Round 3 and Stray Round as there is
very little time for the entire counselling process and there is no process of
reallotment/resignation, downloading of allotment order after payment of Tuition Fees
will be considered as Joined. But the candidate has to report to the allotted School
within the stipulated time. If the candidate does not report candidates will be treated
as Discontinued and his seat will be considered vacant and candidates will forfeit the
advance Tuition Fees.
Please note that under no circumstances date of joining/date of reporting can be
extended by the Selection Committee.
Q. No. 13: What documents are required at the time of Joining/ Reporting to allotted
Government Paramedical Ayush School?
Ans: The following original documents (along with attested photocopies) are required at
the time of joining/reporting to the allotted Government Paramedical Ayush School:
i. Class X Mark Sheet
64
ii. Class XI Mark Sheet
iii. H.S.C. Mark sheet or any other equivalent examination.
iv. Transfer certificate obtained after the completion of H.S.C / equivalent
examination or any other courses.
v. Certificate for proof of study from VI Std. to XII Std for the candidates who have
studied completely in Tamil Nadu.
vi. Community Certificate
vii. Nativity certificate.
viii. Eligibility Certificate (if applicable)
ix. Migration certificate (if applicable)
x. Special Category Certificate (if applicable)
Q. No.14: Will the Selection Committee bear the bank charges incurred by the candidate
while registering for counselling?
Ans: No. Bank Charges if any, incurred by the candidate should be borne by the candidate
only.
Q. No.15: Will the Selection Committee pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition
Fee?
Ans: No. The Selection Committee will not pay interest on the refundable Advance Tuition
Fee.
Q. No. 16: If I forget my password that I have created during the process of registration, how
to retrieve it?
Ans: To retrieve the forgotten password, system facilitates the following process:
The candidate is required to enter the information that candidates filled at the time of
registration and then security question & answer thereon to be entered as given
during New Candidate registration process. The above data submitted by candidate
will be validated with the registered candidate’s database. If the above entries match,
then only the candidate would be permitted to enter new password to proceed
further.
IMPORTANT: Please keep the information same as that you have furnished on the
application form confidential, and do not share the password and OTP with anybody
as to register for online allotment process and submit choice you need that
information. If somebody else uses that information, candidates can misuse your
online registration and prevent you from taking part in online allotment process. Keep
print out of application form ready for reference with you.
65
LIST OF ANNEXURES
ANNEXURES Name
Annexure - I Special categories with their Code Numbers
Annexure - II Certificate of Nativity of Tamil Nadu
Annexure - III Certificate of Department of Ex-Servicemen’s Welfare
Annexure - IV Details of selection of Candidates under Quota for Eminent Sports
Persons
Annexure– IV (A) Declaration of the Candidate for Sports Quota
Annexure - V Certificate of Disability
Annexure–VI Medical Certificate for Administration of Hepatitis-B vaccination
Annexure–VII Joint Declaration by the Candidate and Parent / Guardian
Annexure–VIII (a) Undertaking regarding authorization
Annexure–VIII(b) Authorisation letter
Annexure – IX Declaration by the Applicant and Parent at the time of Joining
Annexure – X FAQs regarding Counselling Process
For Commissioner of Indian Medicine
and Homoeopathy.
66