GOVERNMENT OFTAMIL NADU
PROSPECTUS
FORADMISSIONTO
POSTGRADUATE DEGREE COURSESINSIDDHA
[M.D. (SIDDHA)]
IN
GOVERNMENT SIDDHAMEDICAL COLLEGES
2025–2026Session
(As perG.O.(D) No.1143, Health andFamilyWelfare [IM1-2]
Department,dated 14.10.2025andas amended fromtimeto time).
LASTDATE FOR ONLINESUBMISSIONOF REGISTRATIONIS
22.10.2025BEFORE 5.00PM.
SELECTIONCOMMITTEEOFFICE,
COMMISSIONERATEOF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY,
ARIGNARANNA GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL OFINDIAN MEDICINE CAMPUS
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI-600106.
Websites:www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org
For anyQueries, pleasecontact 044-26216244.
1
IMPORTANT INFORMATIONS
1 Date ofNotification 18-10-2025
2 Date of Commencement of online 18-10-2025
application
3 Last date for submission of Special 22-10-2025 upto 5:00P.M.
Category Application
4 Last date for online submission of 22-10-2025 upto 5:00P.M.
application
5 Date ofdeclaration ofRank list
Will be postedintheofficial website.
Will be postedintheofficial website.
6 Details ofcounselling
7 Period ofdownloading of AllotmentOrder Will be postedintheofficial website.
Counselling for Special Category: Selection Committee,
8
Commissionerate ofIndian Medicine &
InPerson Only
Homoeopathy,
Arignar Anna Government Hospital ofIndian
Medicine Campus,
Arumbakkam, Chennai–600106.
9 Official website www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org
10 HelplineNumber 044-26216244
2
Sl.No. INSTRUCTIONS TOCANDIDATES
1. Candidates seeking admission to Post Graduate Degree - M.D (Siddha) in Government
Siddha Medical Colleges, Chennai and Palayamkottai, affiliated to the Tamil Nadu Dr.
M.G.R. Medical University, for the academic session 2025 - 2026 can be accessed from the
official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org. The application
submission, fees payment and counselling for MD (Siddha) will be ONLINE for the
academicyear 2025-2026.
2. Any change or modification and relevant information pertaining to M.D (Siddha)
Admission process will be made available on the official website: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org.
3. The candidates are instructed to visit the website at least two times a day for updates from
the date of registration till the end of admission process without fail. Selection Committee
will not be responsible for consequences resulting due to non-diligent follow-up of
notifications and publications appearing on the website regarding admission to Post
GraduateDegree MD(Siddha) courses fortheacademic year 2025-2026.
4. Candidates are advised to read the information bulletin for AIAPGET 2025 (Siddha) issued
by National Testing Agency (NTA) AIAPGET-2025 Authority and to carefully go through
the instructions regarding AIAPGET 2025 (Siddha) and visit the website
www.ntaaiapget.nic.in or https://aaccc.gov.in/aacccpg/siddha regarding detailed qualifying
criteria for admissionto PostGraduate Degree Courses 2025–2026session.
5. REGISTRATIONFEE
a. The registration fee for online application for M.D. Siddha is Rs. 3,000/- (Rupees
Three Thousand Only), which is non-refundable. It should be paid through the
onlinebankpayment portal available ontheofficial website.
b. All “SC/SCA/ST candidates who are natives of Tamil Nadu are exempted from
payment of theregistration fee for theapplication.
c. The last date for submission of online registration form will be up to 5:00 P.M.
on 22.10-2025. Thereafter there is no provision for the candidates to submit their
onlineregistration form.
3
6. ONLINEPROCESSING FEE:
All Candidates who want to participate in the Online counselling will have to remit a non-
refundable amount of Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) via online portal, as online
processing fee before choice filling.
7. PAYMENT DETAILS:
Description OC/BC/BCM/ MBC SC/SCA/ST TIME
Registration fee for online
3000 Exempted Whileapplying
application
Onlineprocessing fee 1000 Beforechoice filling
At the time of
Advance tuitionfee 5000
choicelocking.
 After the receipt of the joining report from the Principal of the Government Siddha
Medical College, Chennai and Palayamkottai this advance tuition fees amount will be
transferred to the respective college to get adjusted with the Tuition Fees to be paid by
thecandidates.
 If the candidate fails to join the course after getting allotment order within the stipulated
date and time, he/she will forfeit the advance tuition fee amount as well as the seat
allotted.
8. The candidates allotted to M.D. (Siddha) course through Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine, and Homoeopathy, Arumbakkam,
Chennai, will alone be registered for M.D. (Siddha) Course in The Tamil Nadu
Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai.
4
I. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
1. All the candidates should ensure their eligibility criteria before submitting the online application
form. The candidates are instructed to go through the Prospectus carefully and be clear about all the
instructionswith regard to thesubmission oftheonlineapplication form.
2. The application form other than the one filled in online mode will not be accepted, under any
circumstances.
3. a. Candidates should fill up all mandatory columns, upload all required documents and
submit the duly filled in online application. The candidates may download their filled in
online application form and secure a copy of the same for their future reference.
Subsequent submissionof supporting document(s), is not accepted either oncourier / post/
orin person.
b. Scanned PDF copies of all original certificates must be uploaded during filling the online
application form. The original certificates should be produced in person only at the time of
admissionintherespectivecollege.
4. Service candidates should upload their service particulars as per Annexure–II (Service Proforma)
duly certified by the forwarding authority with date and seal along with the filled in online
application form. They should submit their hard copy of duly filled online Application only through
the proper channel with the remarks of the forwarding authorities in the format prescribed in the
application form to the Secretary, Selection Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy. It should compulsorily reach on or before the last date as mentioned above. If not,
applications will be summarily rejected irrespective of the date of submission by the applicant and
date of forwarding by the competent authority. Advance copies from the service candidates will not
beaccepted.
5. Same passport-size photograph used in AIAPGET 2025 (Siddha) should be uploaded in the
space provided.
6. A list of eligible candidates will be uploaded in our websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org,along with thecorresponding Application RegisterNumber (A.R.No.).
7. All information pertaining to MD (Siddha) admissions will be published on the Department’s
official website: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org from time to time for updates
regarding the PG provisional rank list, online counselling schedule, and other information /
intimations, etc. The Selection Committee shall not be held responsible if any candidate fails to
5
register or fails to lock the seat during online counselling due to ignorance of updates published on
thewebsite. No individualcorrespondence willbe entertained in thisregard.
8. UNAUTHORIZED ABSENCE:
In case of unauthorized absence of candidate for one month or more after getting admitted to the
course, the candidate will be treated as having discontinued without notice and the vacancy will be
filled up from the waiting list depending on the availability of time before the prescribed cut-off
date. Candidates will have to give a declaration to this effect at the time of admission as in Annexure
– V. If the period of absence is beyond the stipulated date as specified by Selection Committee, the
candidate must pay thediscontinuationfee as per clause46(ii)of thisprospectus.
9. Note for Special Category:Persons with Bench Mark Disability (PwD)
a. The candidates applying under PwD is instructed to submit their required documents through as
per Annexure-III through onlineand hard copy should be sent to Selection Committee along with
thedetails oftheir application registration number after final submission.
b. At the time of filling the online application it is mandatory to upload the necessary supportive
documents as mentioned in Annexure- III (with Full SizePhotograph exhibiting thedeformity).
c. Special Category rankdiffers completely from that oftheGeneral Category rank.
d. Special Category candidates cannot claim the samerank in theGeneral Category and viceversa.
e. Candidates are requested to produce a certificate from the District Medical Board of the district
concernedconstitutedforthispurposeassessingthenatureandtheextentofphysicaldisability in the
format prescribed in the Annexure - III. The candidate must have obtained the certificate within
3 months prior to submission of the registration for seeking admission under this category. If the
certificate has been obtained earlier, the application will be rejected. The candidates seeking
admissionunderthiscategoryshouldproducethefull-size photograph exhibiting the deformity
f. ThecandidatesappliedforM.D. (Siddha) course have to undergo medical examination in person
by a Medical Board constituted for the purpose by the Directorate of Medical Education to
ascertainandconfirm thenature andextentofphysicaldisability.
g. The Counselling for the Special Categories will be done in offline mode before the General
Category Online Counselling at Selection committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine &
Homoeopathy, Arignar Anna Government Hospital of Indian Medicine Campus
Arumbakkam, Chennai 106.
h. Counsellingdate forspecial category will beintimated in thewebsite.
i. The claim under Special Category will not be considered, under any circumstances without the
required documents and the application of such candidate shall be considered under General
6
Category only, ifcandidate fulfils thenorms for theGeneral Category.
j. If adequate number of eligible candidates is not available under special category, then the
earmarked seats will be reverted back to general category and filled up with candidates on the
basis ofmerit andcommunal rotation.
II.ELIGIBILITY FOR ADMISSION
10. a. A person possessing the degree of Siddha Maruthuva Arignar (Bachelor of Siddha Medicine and
Surgery) from the Tamil Nadu Dr. MGR Medical University or from any other recognized
University or Board or Medical Institution specified in erstwhile Indian Medicine Central
Council Act 1970 or National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020, and
enrolled in Central Council of Indian System of Medicine or Tamil Nadu Siddha Medical
Council. With successful completion of CRRI before the date fixed by the NCISM /
AIAPGET2025.
b. The candidates should fulfill the eligibility criteria for applying AIAPGET 2025; should have
qualified in AIAPGET 2025 and should have obtained minimum of marks at 50th percentile.
Provided that in respect of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,
Most Backward Classes and Denotified Community, Backward Classes (Muslim) and Backward
Classes; the minimum marks shall be at 40th percentile; for candidates with benchmark
disabilities specified under the Rights of persons with disabilities Act, 2016, the minimum marks
shall be at 45th percentile for the General Category and 40th percentile for the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Most Backward Classes and Denotified Community, Backward Classes
(Muslim)and Backward classes.
Note: Provided further that when sufficient number of candidates in the respective categories fail to
secure minimum marks in the All India AYUSH Post graduate Entrance Test (AIAPGET), as
specified above, held for any academic year for admission to Post Graduate courses, the central
government in consultation with the council may at its discretion lower the minimum marks required
for admission to Post Graduate course for candidates belonging to respective categories and marks
so lowered bythecentral government shall beapplicable forthat academic year only.
11. The candidate should produce the Degree Certificate or the Provisional Degree Certificate-II issued
by the Affiliating University and Medical Registration Certificate issued by Central Council of
Indian System of Medicine or Tamil Nadu SiddhaMedical Council, Chennai, in Original, at thetime
ofjoiningin college.
12.  The Candidate should be a Citizen of India and a Native of Tamil Nadu or should have
undergone B.S.M.S. Coursein theStateof TamilNadu.
7
 Candidates of Tamil Nadu nativity who have completed B.S.M.S. Course in other States
shall upload a Certificate of Nativity in Tamil Nadu issued by a competent authority only in
the specified format prescribed in Annexure – I, and should also upload the Eligibility
Certificate from the Tamil Nadu Dr. M. G. R. Medical university, Chennai and submit the
same tothe college at thetimeofjoining.
 Candidates from other States who have studied BSMS course continuously in Tamil Nadu
willbeconsideredundertheOpenCategory.
 Submission of a false Nativity Certificate, if detected at any stage during the course of study,
will result in expulsion of the candidate and initiation of criminal proceedings against the
candidateandtheirparents,asperthelaw.
 Previously obtained Nativity Certificates (Old format) or e-Nativity Certificates in the latest
updated format issued by an authority not below the rank of Zonal Deputy Tahsildar of the
concernedRevenueJurisdictionwillbeaccepted.
 Community Certificates issued by other States will not be considered for reservation. Such
candidateswillbetreatedundertheOpenCategory.
 Candidates who are claiming community reservation of Tamil Nadu should upload both
following certificates,
(i) Community certificate issued by competent authority from Revenue Department of
Tamil Nadu Government with official seal; and
(ii) Community certificate of either of their Parents issued by competent authority from
Revenue Department ofTamil Nadu Government with official seal.
13. Candidates must fill their AIAPGET 2025 (Siddha) Hall Ticket Roll Number, Marks scored and All
India rank in the relevant fields of the registration form. The original Hall Ticket and Marks
Statementmust beproduced at thetimeofjoining.
14. NOT ELIGIBLE
 Candidates who join a Post Graduate Degree [MD (Siddha)] in any branch and discontinue the
course on any grounds after the cutoff date fixed by NCISM are not eligible to apply for two
subsequentacademicyears.
 Candidates who have completed a Post Graduate Degree [MD (Siddha)] or the candidates who
possess a Post Graduate Degree [MD (Siddha)] in one Specialty / Branch of study are not
eligible toapply foradmission to any other PostGraduate degree i.e., in any other branches.
 List of Candidates notified / intimated as NOT Eligible by AYUSH Admissions Central
CounsellingCommittee(AACCC) from timeto time.
8
III. DEFINITIONOFSERVICE CANDIDATES&NON-SERVICE CANDIDATES
SERVICECANDIDATES:
15. The following categories of Siddha Medical Graduates only will be treated as Service candidates
andconsidered forselection against 50%ofseats reserved exclusively forservice candidates.
(i) SiddhaMedical Graduates who were selected bytheTamil Nadu PublicService Commission /
Medical Services Recruitment Board and other regularized service candidates and appointed in
the Tamil Nadu Medical Service on regular basis, who have put in minimum of TWO years
satisfactory and continuous service excluding leave period such as Earned Leave, Unearned
Leave on Medical Certificate, Unearned Leave on Private Affairs, Maternity Leave and any
other unauthorized absence, as on 31.07.2025 either in Tamil Nadu Medical Service or local
bodies and stateorganizations.
(ii)Candidates above 50years as on31.07.2025are not eligible to apply.
(iii)SiddhaMedical Graduates who are approved Probationers and whoare working
a. As Medical Officers working (continuously for two years) in Local Bodies in Tamil Nadu.
A doctor absorbed from the Panchayat Union into Government Service as per G.O.Ms. No
435 / H&FW / IMI-2 Dept. dated: 23-11-2000 will be considered as Service Candidates
provided that they shouldhave completed 2years of service.
b. In Government ofIndia Institutions in theStateofTamil Nādu.
c. In PublicSectorUndertaking and Organizations under theControl of
Government ofIndiainTamil Nadu.
d. In undertaking ororganization ofGovernment ofTamil Nadu.
Note:
The candidates under Clause 15, sub clause (iii) item (a) to (d) above should give an undertaking
to the concerned authorities that they will serve for 5 years in their respective institutions after the
completion ofcourse. They should produce a certificate from the concerned authority to showthat
they have given such an undertaking as perTamil Nadu Government rules.
16. NON-SERVICECANDIDATES:
The followingcategory of SiddhaMedical Graduates willbe treated as Non-Service Candidates
a.Private SiddhaPractitioners Registered under Tamil Nadu Board ofIndian Medicine.
b. Those service candidates selected by TNPSC / MSRB who have put in less than two years of
continuous regular service as on31.07.2025will betreated as non-Service candidates.
c. All others who have put in less than two years of state government service or who are working
in Central Government, Public Sector undertaking, Central Government Health Scheme
9
(CGHS), Local bodies, National Rural Health Mission and Municipalities in Tamil Nadu and
Tamil Nadu Government undertakings and organizations will be treated as non-Service
candidates.
17. PROCEDURE FORFILLING ANDSUBMISSIONOF ONLINE APPLICATIONFORM
 Candidates are advised to download the Prospectus from the official website and read it
thoroughly before fillingthe onlineregistration form for theacademic year 2025–2026.
 Thecandidate should log intotheofficial website: www.tnayushselection.org
 Registration forms will beavailable onlinefrom 18-10-2025 to 22-10-2025 upto5:00 P.M.
 Candidates should pay a non-refundable registration fee of Rs. 3,000/- (Rupees Three
Thousand only) towards application form through theonlinepayment portal.
I. General Instructions
a. All mandatory fields inapplication mustbecompleted.
b. Relevant documents should be uploaded in PDF format except photo and signature.
c. Thecompleted registration must besubmittedonlineafter verifying all details.
d. No request for changes in any particulars will be entertained after the application has been
submitted.
II. Documents to beUploaded
Candidates must uploadscanned PDFcopies ofthefollowing original certificates:
1. AIAPGET (Siddha)2025Admit Card and ScoreCard
2. Class XMark Sheet (both sides)orBirth Certificate
3. B.S.M.S. Final Year Mark Sheet
4. TransferCertificate obtained after completion ofB.S.M.S.
5. Community Certificate (ifapplicable)
6. Nativity Certificate (ifapplicable)
7. Eligibility Certificate from The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University (for candidates who
studiedB.S.M.S. in otheruniversity/state)
8. CRRICompletioncertificate
9. Registration certificate
10. Degreeor Provisional Certificate
11. Samepassport sizephotograph used inAIAPGET 2025(Siddha)
10
12. Signature inrunning handwriting. Initials orfull name in capital letters are notaccepted.
13. Additional supportingdocuments (ifany)
Note:
 Ensure thephotograph and signature are uploaded in thecorrect fields.
 After submission, candidates are advised to download and keep a copy of the filled-in
onlineregistration for future reference.
 The Originals certificates must beproduced at thetimeof Admissionincollege.
III. Declarationand Verification
 All entries in theonlineregistration form must befilled carefully bythecandidate.
 The candidate must ensure that all information, including academic marks and uploaded
documents, are trueand accurate.
 If anydiscrepancy isfound during scrutiny:
a. The candidate willforfeit theiradmission, regardless ofthestageof thecourse.
b.Thecandidate will bedebarred from pursuing any other coursefor aperiod ofthree years.
c. Legal/criminal action will beinitiated against thecandidate for submitting false documents
(e.g., mark sheet, degree certificate, communitycertificate, nativitycertificate etc).
IV.Instructions forFilling the OnlineApplicationForm
a. The candidate mustverify eligibility before submittingthe application form.
b. Only application submitted online will be accepted. Application submitted through any other
modewill berejected.
V. Accessing andFilling theOnlineApplicationForm:
1. Visittheofficial website: www.tnayushselection.org
2. Enterthefollowing particulars intheonlineapplication form:
 Name oftheCandidate
 Name ofParent/Guardian
 Permanent and Communication Address
 Date ofBirth
 Gender
 Nationality and Nativity
 Religion
11
 Community, Caste, and related details
 AadhaarNumber
 AIAPGET (Siddha)RollNumber, Register Number, Score, and Rank
 Name ofCollege and University forB.S.M.S.
 Total marks obtained in finalyear BSMS
 MotherTongue
 CivicDetails
 NativeDistrict
 EligibilityCertificate (ifapplicable)
 Any other document (optional, ifapplicable)
1.Upload:
 Recently taken passport sizephotograph (size50KB to100KB).
 Signature in running handwriting (size 10 KB to 50 KB). Initials or full name in capital letters are
not accepted.
2.Ensure thephotograph and signature are uploaded in thecorrect fields.
VI. ImportantPoints
1. Only oneapplication shouldbe submitted per candidate.
2. Ensure all information and documents are accurate at thetimeof submission.
3. Incomplete application orapplication withoutmandatory enclosures will berejected.
4. Registration fee towards application form once paidis non-refundable.
5. Application once submittedcannot bewithdrawn.
18. METHODOF FEEPAYMENT:
i. ModeofPayment:
The application and course fee should be paid through Debit Card (except Visa / Master
Card), Credit Card, Net Banking, UPI or Digital Wallets (such as Google Pay, Paytm,
etc.). Necessary facilities forpayment have been integrated intotheonlinepayment portal.
ii. ImportantNote:
Mere deduction of the amount from the bank account is not considered as proof of
successful fee payment. Candidates must ensure that the payment confirmation is received
and that theapplication status reflects thesuccessful transaction.
iii. Preparation BeforePayment:
12
Beforeproceeding withpayment, candidates are advised to:
a. Check thevalidityof theirDebit/Credit Card.
b. Keep necessary banking orpayment information readily available.
c. Enter all requested details whilemaking thepayment ontheportal carefully.
iv. Refundof AdvanceTuitionFee:
The candidates withdrawing on or before the stipulated date and time of joining in Round 1
and Round 2, the advance tuition fee will be refunded only to the bank account for which
details are provided at the time of application. Candidates are advised to ensure that the
account details entered in theonlineapplication form are accurate and belongto them.
19. DURATIONOF M.D.(SIDDHA) COURSE:
Theduration of theMD(Siddha) coursewill befor three years.
IV. MODE OF SELECTIONAND ADMISSION
20. A Provisional Rank List of eligible candidates will be prepared based on the marks and rank
obtained in AIAPGET (Siddha) – 2025. Admission to the M.D. (Siddha) course will be made strictly
from this ranklist only.
The Secretary, Selection Committee will publish the provisional rank list on the official website:
www.tnayushselection.org
Tie-BreakingCriteria (Inter-seMerit):
If two or more candidates have secured the same number of marks, the tie shall be resolved and
inter-se merit shall bedetermined basedonthe higherrank in AIAPGET 2025(Siddha)
21. i)Non –Service candidates:
Admission to the course will be made purely on merit, based on the marks obtained in the
AIAPGET 2025(Siddha).
ii)Service Candidates:
Admission to the course will be made based on marks obtained in AIAPGET 2025 (Siddha) with
additional weightage marks awarded to eligible in-service Candidates. One mark will be awarded
for each completed year of Government Service. Two marks will be awarded for each completed
year of Government service in Hill areas and it will be limited to maximum of 10 marks, as per
G.O.(Ms)No.320 Health and Family Welfare [IM 1-2]Department, dated: 26.09.2023.
22. ALLOTMENTOF SEATS:
The Selection Committee will allot seats to the Colleges and Branches of study based on the merit
and following 69% rule of reservation or 200 points roster depending upon the seat matrices
13
provided by the affiliating University and subject to the availability of seats at the time of
individual’s turn.
23. SEATSRESERVEDFORSERVICECANDIDATES
50% of seats in each specialty and in each college are reserved for service candidates, in addition to
those service candidates selected in the Open Category. In case an odd number of seats remains in
any specialty in the total seats sanctioned for that specialty, that seat shall be allotted to Open
Category and willbe filled based onMerit andCommunalrotation.
24. RULE OF RESERVATION:
RuleofReservation willbe followed as follows:
Open competition - 31%
Backward Classes - 26.5%
Backward Classes (Muslim) - 3.5%
Most Backward/ Denotified Communities - 20%
Scheduled Caste - 18%
Scheduled Tribe - 1%
Within the 18% reservation for Scheduled Castes16% out of 18%reservation will be provided for
S.C. Arunthathiyars (SCA). While filling the application form, kindly refer Caste Code
Mentioned inCommunities Annexedwith the prospectus.
25. Any remaining unfilled seats for want of adequate number of eligible candidates belonging to SCA
communities shall be filled by candidates belonging to SC community other than Arunthathiyars as
per meritand vice versawithout exceeding thequota forSC communityas a whole.
26. Any remaining reserved seats in ST quota for want of adequate number of eligible candidates
belonging to ST community shall be allotted to candidates belonging to SC community as per merit
withoutexceeding thequotafor SCand ST communityas awhole.
27. Any remaining unfilled seats in BCM Community for want of adequate number of eligible
candidates after exhausting the merit list shall be filled up on merit basis by candidates belonging to
BC community withoutexceeding thequotaforBC community as awhole.
28. Candidates will be allowed to choose their Branch of Study at the time of choice filling, subject to
the availability of vacancy in that branch in the college, when the candidate gets his / her turn.
Branch once opted and allotted at the time of online Counselling shall be final and will not be
allowed to change subsequently under any circumstances. Similarly, no transfer from one branch to
another branch willbe allowed duringthe course period of 3 years.
14
29. For the specialty of Pura Maruthtuvam, Varmam Maruthuvam, Siddhar Yoga Maruthuvam, the
reservation policy is200 point rosteras per Government ofTamil Naduas thenumber ofseats is less
than 8in each branch.
30. V. TENTATIVESEAT MATRICES
Total Numberof seats: 94
Total
GSMC, GSMC,
Name oftheBranch Seats
Palayamkottai Chennai
Available
PothuMaruthuvam 10 10 20
Marundiyal 5 5 10
Gunapadam Marundaka
5 5 10
viyal
Kuzhanthai Maruthuvam 10 5 15
Noi Nadal 10 4 14
NanjuNoolumMaruthuvaNe
10 0 10
ethiNoolum
PuraMaruthuvam 3* 2* 5
VarmamMaruthuvam 3* 1* 4
SiddharYoga Maruthuvam 4* 2* 6
Total 60 34 94
*Number of seats available is subject to change based on the seat matrix issued by the Tamil
Nadu Dr. MGR Medical University and the approval & allotment by Ministry of AYUSH,
Government ofIndia.
Details GSMC, GSMC, Chennai Total
Palayamkottai
Total Sanctioned Strength 60 34 94
All India Quota (15 %) 9 5 14
Surrendered Seats
StateQuotaSeats (85%) 51 29 80
Special Category* 2 2 4
(a) PWD5%
ServiceCandidates: 2/ Non-Service Candidates: 2
(Persons with Disability)
Special Category**
Nil 3
(b) Central Govt. 3
Nomination (CGN)
15
(Will be filled by Ministry
of AYUSH, through
AACCC)
Special Category ***
5 Nil 5
(c) Foreign Nationals
nominated byGOI
SEATSALLOTTEDTO/ RESERVEDFORSPECIAL CATEGORIES
(a) *Persons with Disability (PWD)
5 % of the total number of state Government quota seats (80) available in Government Siddha
Medical Colleges isreserved forthe Persons withDisability (PWD)candidates.
Govt. SiddhaMedical College, Chennai: 2Seats (Service: 1,Non-Service: 1)
Govt. SiddhaMedical College, Palayamkottai: 2Seats .(Service: 1,Non-Service: 1)
The Persons with Benchmark Disability (PWD) should obtain certificate from Designated
DisabilityCentre such as Madras Medical College/ RajivGandhi Government General Hospital,
Chennai.
(b)**Central Govt. Nomination(CGN) :3Seats
(will befilled byMinistry ofAYUSH, through AACCC)
Govt. SiddhaMedical College, Palayamkottai : 3Seats
ONE seateach inthefollowing specialities:
(i) Maruthuvam
(ii) Noi nadal
(iii) Kuzhanthai Maruthuvam
(c) ***Foreign Nationals nominated by Govt. Of India under AYUSH Scholarship Schemes
andimplemented byIndian CouncilforCulturalRelations (ICCR): 5Seats
Govt. SiddhaMedical College, Palayamkottai: 5Seats
[Reserved seats meant for Foreign Nationals are distributed among the branches of study for M.D.
(Siddha)course and are as follows for theacademicsession 2025–2026:
 PothuMaruthuvam -1seat
 Gunapadam -1seat
 Kuzhanthai Maruthuvam -2seats
 Nanju Noolum Maruthuva Neethi Noolum -1seat
16
31. ROUNDS OFONLINECOUNSELLING BASEDONTHEVACANCIES
There are four Roundsofcounselling
I. Round 1
II. Round 2
III. Round 3
IV. Stray Round.
OnlinecounsellingforRound2,Round3andStrayRoundwillbedoneonlyifthereisvacancy
32. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FORCOUNSELLING:
i.OnlineprocessingFee:
All candidates should pay a non-refundable amount of Rs.1,000 /- (Rupees One Thousand only)
towardsprocessing fee forcounsellingat thetimeofchoicefilling.
ii AdvanceTuitionFee:
At the time of choice locking, candidates must pay a refundable advance tuition fee of Rs.5,000
(RupeesFiveThousandonly)forGovernmentquotaseats.
Note:Thisamountwillnotberefundedifaseatisallottedfromthethirdroundofcounselling.
iii. CounsellingSchedule:
Thecounsellingschedulewillbepublishedontheofficialwebsitewww.tnayushselection.org.
Candidatesmustloginandlocktheirchoicesforeachroundofcounsellingwithinthestipulateddate
andtimeaspertheschedule.
iv. ChoiceFilling:
 Candidatesareadvisedtobecarefulduringchoicefillingandtoselectpreferredcollegesand
specialtiesaccordingtotheirindividualpreferences.
 Choicescanbeediteduntiltheyarelocked.
 Oncechoicesarelocked,theycannotbemodifiedunderanycircumstances.
v. SeatAllotment:
Admission to M.D. (Siddha) courses will be through online counselling, based on candidate rank
andasperreservationnorms,consideringthepreferencesenteredbythecandidate.
vi. SecurityGuidelines:
Candidates should not share their login credentials (Login ID, Password, OTP) with anyone to
ensuredatasecurityandpreventmisuse.
vii.ProvisionalAllotment:
Provisionally selected candidates for Government seats must download the provisional allotment
orderandjointhecollegeinwhichtheyareallottedinstipulateddateandtime.
17
viii. Transfers:
Mutual transfers or individual requests for college transfer will not be entertained under any
circumstances.
ix. EligibilityforFurtherRounds:`
Candidateswho havejoineda seatuptoRound3andwho havebeen allotted seatin Round3ofAll
India Quota or State Quota counselling will not be eligible to participate in subsequent rounds for
eitherquotafromtheacademicyear2025–2026,aspertheNCISMInformationBulletin.
x. CentralizedDataUpload:
The Medical Counselling Committee (MCC) of NCISM, MoHFW, has developed a centralized
software platform for all participating States/Counselling Authorities under AACCC. This platform
will be used to upload the names and roll numbers of candidates who have joined up to Round 3
(andfurtherrounds)undertheStateQuotaorRound3oftheAllIndiaQuotaonacommonportal.
I. ROUND 1OFONLINE COUNSELLING
a. Candidates should pay thefollowing fee through theonlinebank payment portal:
 Anon-refundable onlineprocessing fee ofRs.1000/-(Rupees OneThousand only) at the
timeofchoice filling.
 A refundable advance tuition fee of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) at time of
choice locking.
b. Candidates are advised to be careful during choice filling and are encouraged to select only
preferred colleges and specialties.
c. Choices can be edited before locking. However, once the choices are locked, they cannot be
modified underany circumstances.
d. Candidates who are allotted a seat in Round 1 of the online counselling should download their
provisional allotment order and join the course in the respective colleges on or before the stipulated
dateand time.
II. ROUND2OF ONLINE COUNSELLING
a. Candidates who wish to retain their allotted seats and do not want a change in college are
notrequired toparticipate in Round2.
b. Candidates who are allotted a seat in Round 1 and joined / not joined or discontinued
the course within the stipulated date and time will remain eligible to participate in the
round 2ofthe onlinecounselling
18
c. Re-allotment of seats will be permitted during Round 2 and Round 3 of counselling, based
onthecandidate's rank and in accordance withthereservation norms.
d. Re-choice filling is not required for candidates who have locked their choice in Round 1
butwere notallotted a seat in thesame round.
e. Fresh choice filling is permitted in Round 2 only for candidates who did not lock their
choice in Round 1 and such candidates should pay a non-refundable online processing fee
of Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) at the time of choice filling and a refundable
advancetuitionfee of Rs.5,000/-(Rupees Five Thousand only) at timeofchoice locking.
f. If a candidate is upgraded/ re-allotted in Round 2, he/she will have no claim over the seat
allotted to them in Round 1and have to join seat allotted in Round 2. In addition, the seat
allotted in Round 1 will be made available to other candidates based on descending order
ofprovisional rank listand not ascending order.
g. Choice filling for Round 2 will follow the payment of online processing fee is not
mandatory for:
 Candidates seeking upgradation
 Not-joined candidates
 Unallotted candidates
h. A candidate who has not joined or discontinued the course before the stipulated time will
remain eligible for subsequent rounds of the counselling for the academic year 2025–2026
withoutforfeiting any fee.
i. A candidate who has joined and discontinued the course after the stipulated time should
forfeit the advance tuition fee already paid by the candidate. In addition, he/she should pay
the Discontinuation feeof Rs. 10,000,00/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) and then he/she is not
beeligible for Round3.
VIRTUAL VACANCIES
 If a candidate allotted a seat in Round 1 opts for upgradation in Round 2, that Round 1 seat
willbe displayed as a virtual vacancy.
 All candidates will be allowed to fill choices for virtual vacancies during Round 2 choice
filling.
 However, such seats will beconverted toreal vacancies and allotted in Round2onlyifthe
candidate from Round 1vacates or upgrades theseat.
19
III. ROUND 3OF ONLINECOUNSELLING
After completion of Round 2 of Online counselling, the remaining vacancies will be filled up with
the candidates from theexisting Provisional Merit list byRound3Online counselling.
FeePayment
Candidates who would liketo participate in Round3of onlinecounselling and not paid thenon-
refundable onlineprocessing fee of₹1,000/-(Rupees OneThousand only) andadvancetuition fee
₹5,000/-(Rupees Five Thousand only) via theonlinebankpayment portal intheearlier rounds,
should paythesame, whilefillingtheir choice.
Eligibility forRound3
a. Candidates who filled their choice for Round 1 or Round 2 but were not allotted any seat are
eligible and notrequired tolock their choice again.
b. Fresh choice filling is allowed for candidates who have not filled their choice in Round 1 or
Round 2.
c. Candidates who have joined a seat up to Round 3 of All India Quota or State Quota counselling
will not be eligible to participate in any further rounds of counselling for the academic year 2025–
2026,as per theNCISM Information Bulletin.
d.Candidates upgraded from Round2toRound 3must:
Have noclaim overthe seat allotted to them in Round2.
Have to JointheRound 3allotted seat withinthestipulated dateand time.
e. Once a candidate joined the Round 3 seat, they will not be allowed to upgrade, withdraw, or
resign from that seat underany circumstances.
f. Candidates whofail to join theseat allotted in Round 3will:
Forfeit both theonlineprocessing fee and advance tuition fee paid
Becomeineligible for any further rounds of counselling.
Hence, the Candidates are advised to exercise duediligence in theiroptions and donot fill unwanted
optionsin which they donotwish to pursue studies.
IV. STRAYROUND OF COUNSELLING
a. Stray vacancies, if any, arising after the completion of Round 3 counselling will be filled
through a Stray Round, conducted by the Selection Committee under the direction of the
CommissionerofIndian Medicine and Homoeopathy byfollowing the guidelines ofNCISM.
b. Only candidates who are not holding any seat in the M.D. (Siddha) course (have not been
20
allotted seats in Round 1,Round2and Round3) are eligible to participatein this round.
c. Candidates who have already joined any seat under the All India or State Quota for M.D.
(Siddha)are not eligible forthis round.
a. Candidates whowant toparticipate a fresh in theStray Round (orany subsequent special
rounds), they mustpaya non-refundable onlineRegistrationfee ofRs.3,000/- (Rupees Three
Thousand only) towards application, OnlineProcessing fee ofRs.1,000 /-(Rupees One
Thousand only) and advance tuitionfee of Rs.5,000/-(Rupees Five Thousand only) viathe
onlinebank payment portal.
d. If a seat is allotted intheStray Round,the candidate should download theprovisional
allotment orderand Join theallotted collegewithin thestipulated dateand timementioned in
theallotment order. If a candidate either fails to download theallotment order, or
downloaded butfails tojoin theallotted college withinthestipulated deadline,
then theregistration fee andadvance tuition fee paid bythecandidates will beforfeited, and
thecandidate will bebarred from participating in M.D. (Siddha)counselling forthenext
academicyear.
e. If a candidate joined thecollege through theStray Roundand then discontinuedthecourse
after thestipulated dateand timeas prescribed byNCISM/AACCCor theStateSelection
Committee, theregistration fee and advance tuitionfee paidbythecandidates will be
forfeited. In addition,he/shemust pay adiscontinuationfee ofRs.10,00,000/-(Rupees Ten
Lakhs only).
V. Malpractice/ Misconduct/ Legal Violations
i. If any candidate is found to have engaged in impersonation, suppressed or misrepresented facts, or
submitted falsified/bogus certificates, the provisional allotment order will be cancelled and
legal/criminal proceedings will beinitiated.
ii. If, during AIAPGET (Siddha) PG 2025 or at any stage of the allotment/admission process for
M.D. (Siddha) 2025–2026 in Tamil Nadu, a candidate is found guilty of impersonation (e.g.,
mismatched photograph/signature/documents), they will be handed over to the police by the
principal or the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, and the case will be pursued
under the Indian Penal Code. Such candidates will be permanently debarred from future M.D.
(Siddha)admissions inTamil Nadu.
21
iii.Disclaimer
TheSelection Committee shall notbe responsiblefor:
 Rules andregulations of theNCISM orany other authority
 Candidates are advised to review the official websites of respective colleges and NCISM before
exercising theirchoices.
iv. SeatMatrix Notification
The seat matrix for Government Quota seats in Government Siddha Medical Colleges will be
published ontheofficial websiteprior tocounselling.
33. Candidates allotted seat inspecial category are not eligible forGeneral Counselling.
34. Branch and college once opted and allotted to the candidate at the time of online Counselling
cannotbechangedsubsequently under anycircumstances.
35. The Post Graduate Degree course M.D. (Siddha) admissions for 2025 – 2026 session will be closed
on the cut-off date of admission as prescribed by the Ministry of AYUSH/ National Commission for
Indian System of Medicine / Government of India /Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University for
theacademic year 2025–2026.
36. Candidates who have joined a Post-Graduate Degree M.D. (Siddha) Course in any discipline and
have discontinued the course on any grounds after the cut-off date, are not eligible to apply for two
subsequent academic years of any discipline in Post Graduate degree Course M.D. (Siddha). Further
the candidate shall be considered as discontinued and should pay the Discontinuation Fee as per this
prospectus.
37. The candidates who join Post Graduate Degree course M.D. (Siddha) should not indulge in any kind
of agitation / strike / ragging activity inside / outside the college campus during the course of study.
Candidates will havetogive a DisciplineDeclaration to this effect at the timeofadmission as in
Annexure–IV. Candidates found to take part in any such activities mentioned above will be expelled
from the course/college at any point during the course of study and criminal action will be taken
againstthem.
38. OfficialCommunication
All communications related to the counselling process will be published exclusively on the official
website: www.tnayushselection.org.
Any changes, updates, modifications, or important announcements pertaining to the admission
process willbe immediately updated onthewebsite.
Candidates are advised to check thewebsiteregularly for thelatest information.
22
39. In respect of Special Category candidates, the other conditions for admission to Post Graduate
M.D.(Siddha)course will beapplicableas in thecase oftheGeneral Category.
Note 1for Special Category (b) [Foreign Candidates only]:
 Special category for Foreign candidates Application forms with all required enclosures
should be submitted through proper channel i.e., Registration being forwarded by the Foreign
Government through the Indian Embassy routed to the Ministry of External Affairs through
ICCR to Ministry of AYUSH for nomination. Further, the photo copy of the completed
Application form with all required enclosures and requisite Registration fee should be
submittedin advance byRegistered Post /Courier Service /Speed Postto:
TheSecretary,
Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of IndianMedicineand Homoeopathy,
ArignarAnna Govt. Hospital ofIndian MedicineCampus,
Arumbakkam, Chennai 600106,
Tamil Nadu, India.
 Candidate’s presence is essential for counselling. Absence for any reason including non-
receipt ofvisa, etc., is notacceptable and the nominated Registration willbe rejected.
 Produce the Visa and Passport, Identification certificate, Eligibility Certificate and relevant
documents in original at the time of admission and foreigner’s registration certificate issued by the
competent authority inIndiaat thetimeofadmission.
40. No re-allotment forSpecial Category (only forPWD).
If adequate number of eligible candidates is not available under Special Category, the earmarked
seats will be reverted back to general category. Any discontinued / not joined vacancies in Special
category (PwD only) will beadded to General Category inthesubsequent phases ofcounselling.
VII.SALARYTOSERVICE/STIPENDTONON-SERVICECANDIDATES
41. SALARYFORTHESERVICECANDIDATESINLIEUOFSTIPEND:
i. Candidates who have been regularly appointed in the Tamil Nadu Medical Service and
selected under the category of service candidates will alone be paid salary as per
Government orders inforce.
ii. Service candidates will be paid salary by their respective organizations, institutions /
Government etc.,
iii. Service Candidates from Local Bodies will not be paid any salary by the Government
during theperiod of study.
23
42. STIPENDTONON-SERVICECANDIDATES:
It should be noted carefully that the MD (Siddha) Course is a full-time programme where the
candidate is expected to be exposed on all days to a variety of patients. For this reason, an amount
specified by the Government will be paid as stipend to the candidates. Therefore, students shall not
participate in any activity outside the college or additional to the course or medical duties and no
permission shall beavailable for thesamefor whatsoever reason.
43. All the Post Graduate MD (Siddha) students shall attend the Out Patient ward session, in case of
both clinical and non-clinical Post Graduate courses and also In-Patient ward session in the case of
clinical Post Graduate Courses and the theory classes for all the Post Graduate courses every day
without fail and regularly. In case, a student attends only Outpatient session or In-patient ward
session and does not attend theTheory classes or viceversa, such PostGraduate student shall not be
eligible for any stipend for the day since the M.D. (Siddha) is a whole-time course. Every student
shall fulfil the minimum requirement of attendance as may be prescribed by the Tamil Nadu Dr.
M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai from time to time for becoming eligible to take up the
examination of the said University. If a Post Graduate student is not permitted to take up the said
University’s examinations as per the regulations in force and amended from time to time and
consequently if the period of study is extended, no stipend shall be paid to such student for such
period of extension of study. The Post Graduate students shall be subject to the rules, regulations,
conventions and practice being followed in the hospital and the concerned medical college and code
of conduct, rules etc., as laid down by the Government, the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University andtheNational Commissionfor Indian Medicine, New Delhi from timeto time.
44. In case of breach of any such rules, regulations etc., as stated above, the principal of the respective
Siddha Medical College shall take appropriate disciplinary action against such student including the
disqualification of the student to continue further Post Graduate studies and communicate the same
to theTamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R.Medical University.
45. IMPORTANTCONDITIONS
i. Servicecandidates willnotbeeligibleforstudyleave.
ii. The entire period spent by service candidates for undergoing M.D. (Siddha) course with
stipend will be treated as duty for all purpose viz. probation, increment, pension, etc.,
except for thepurpose of payand leave.
iii. In case, where the stipend period is to be counted towards probation period, orders of the
Government havetobeobtained for therelaxationof therelevant rules.
iv. No paid post will be given to candidates who are selected for M.D. (Siddha) Course and
24
they shall work full time in the Department of their respective specialties. They should
not indulge inprivate practice during theperiod of study.
46. (i) All Candidates (Service and Non-Service) undergoing the M.D. (Siddha) course should
execute a Bond as per Annexure VI to the effect that in the event of discontinuing their
studies before completion of the course, they shall be liable for refund of the full amount of
stipend received by them till the day of discontinuation along with three sureties in permanent
Government Service ofequal rank or aboveat the timeof admissionto thecourse.
(ii) Further, the Candidates who discontinue the course on or after the last date of allotment of
seats / cut-off date for admission processes pertaining to the Academic session 2025 – 2026
as fixed by Ministry of AYUSH / Affiliating University, shall pay the discontinuation fee
of a sum of Rs. 10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) by means of Demand Draft drawn in
favour of “The Director of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, Chennai -106” payable at
Chennai. Unless the penalty amount is paid in total, the Candidates will not be relieved and
original certificates / documents will be retained by the college authorities. All candidates shall
executea bondtothis effect at thetimeof admission totheCollege.
(iii)Forfeitureof Tuitionand OtherFees:
 Candidates pursuing M.D.(Siddha) course in the event of discontinuing their studies on or
after the cut-off date for admission processes relevant to the particular admission session
may also have to fore go the Tuition fees and other kinds of fees remitted to the college
authority during the period of study. This applies even if the discontinuation is due to
personal, medical, or professional reasons. The candidates who discontinue their study
before the completion of M.D.(Siddha) course are liable to fulfill the above conditions.
Hence, Candidates are advised to thoroughly understand the bond conditions and evaluate
theircommitmentbefore accepting admission, as theabove rules will bestrictly enforced.
 Service Candidates selected to the course should execute a bond in the prescribed form
47. available at the College at thetime of admission, for Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten lakhs only)
along with three sureties in permanent Government Service of equal rank orhigher rank than
the candidate for an equivalent amount at the time of admission, in pursuance of their
undertaking to the effect that they shall serve the concerned Government or local body,
etc. for a minimumperiod offiveyears after the completion ofthecourse.
 If the service candidate serves for a period less than five years, the proportion of the salary
and stipend or other payments made to the candidate during the course period in relation to
the ratio of period in whole months served over the requirement of sixty months shall be
25
treated as the candidate entitlement and the remaining amount which relates to the short fall
and period of commitment shall be recovered from the service candidate or paid by
candidate priorto candidate’s discharge from service.
48. Candidates undergoing the M.D. (Siddha) Course who have secured appointment in Tamil Nadu
Medical Service through the Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission / Medical Services
Recruitment Board shall not be permitted to discontinue the course without satisfying the condition
of their bond. They shall also not be permitted to re-join the MD (Siddha) course midway at a later
point of time or retain rights to join the M.D (Siddha). course without completing the waiting period
and without appearing in the AIAPGET (Siddha) pertaining to the relevant academic year except in
accordance with orders of Government through Health Department regulating readmission in respect
ofsuchdiscontinuance.
49. All Government Orders issued and to be issued from time to time, relating to any of the matters
mentioned in this Prospectus, shall be deemed to form an integral part of this Prospectus. The terms
and conditions laid down in such Government Orders will be automatically incorporated and will
have bindingeffect onall candidates.
50. No admission, re-allotment / transfer shall be made after cut-off date for the academic year as per the
guidelines issued by the MoA (Ministry of AYUSH) and The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University.
51. COVID-19INSTRUCTION
The candidates and their parents attending Special Category Counselling are instructed to followthe
standard preventive measures to reduce the risk of COVID-19 during the counselling as per the
Government order from timetotime.
ForCommissionerofIndianMedicine
andHomoeopathy.
26
CHECK LIST FOR M.D.(SIDDHA) ADMISSION 2025-2026 SESSION
CATEGORY-I CANDIDATES WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU AND
: STUDIED BSMSCOURSEINTAMILNADU
CATEGORY-II: CANDIDATES WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU BUT
STUDIED BSMS COURSE PARTLY/ FULLY IN OUTSIDE
TAMILNADU
CATEGORY-III: CANDIDATESWHOARENON-NATIVEOFTAMILNADUAND
STUDIEDBSMSCOURSECONTINUOUSLYINTAMILNADU
CATEGORY
CERTIFICATES/ DOCUMENTS CATEGORYI CATEGORYII
III
DOCUMENTS OF CANDIDATE’S ARE AS FOLLOWS:
X-Mark Sheet/Birth Certificate   
BSMSFinalYearMarkSheet/Sheets   
Transfer Certificate   
Nativity Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil Nadu  
CommunityCertificatefromCompetentAuthorityofTamil
 
Nadu(except-OC)
Special Category Certificates for Persons with Bench mark
Disabilities, (ifapplicable)   
Candidate’s Aadhar card   
DOCUMENTS OF PARENTS ARE AS FOLLOWS:
ParentCommunityCertificatefromCompetentAuthorityof
 
TamilNadu(except-OC)
27
ROUND FREE RESIGNATION EXIT WITH Eligibility FOR DISCONTINUATION FEES
EXIT FORFEITURE FURTHER AFTERJOINING
OFFEE COUNSELLING
Round1 Allowed Allowed Allowedto Eligible for NIL,beforeRound2
exit further
counselling
Round2 Allowed Allowed only Allowed to Eligiblefor If thecandidatesresignbeforethe
exit within further stipulated date in Round 2 the
oncewithin
stipulated counselling candidates will be allowed free
stipulatedtime
time without exit.
forfeiture
After the stipulated date in round
2, discontinuation fees will be
Rs.10,00,000 lakhs and forfeit
Advancetuitionfees.
Round3 Not Notallowed If not joined, Not allowed in After joining the allotted seat of
allowed forfeit Advance nextround round3,discontinuation feeswill
tuitionfee be Rs.10,00,000 lakhs and
forfeiture of Advance tuition
feeswillalsoapply.
Round 4 Not Notallowed If not joined Not eligible for After joining the allotted seat of
(Stray allowed forfeit nextoneyear. Stray round, discontinuation fees
round) Advance will be Rs.10,00,000 lakhs and
tuition fees & forfeiture of Advance tuition
Tuitionfee fees&Tuitionfeewillalsoapply.
28
ROUND CANDIDATE FORFEITUREOFFEES ELIGIBILITY
If allottedand Can participate in round 2 for
Noforfeitureoffees
joined re- allotment
Ifallottedandnot
Can participate in subsequent rounds
joined/Discontinue Noforfeitureoffees
Round1 ofcounseling
d
If notallotted/If not Canparticipateinsubsequentrounds
choice locked ofcounseling
No forfeiture of fees. Allowed to Allowed for further rounds of
If allottedand
vacate seat once before the counseling
joined
stipulated date.
If allotted/Re- Noforfeitureoffees Allowed for further rounds of
allotted and counseling
notjoined
Round2 If not choice
Noforfeitureoffees Eligibleforround3
locked
If wants to Forfeiture ofadvancetuition fee and Not eligibleforround3
discontinueafter pay discontinuation fee
thestipulated date
and time
If notallotted Eligibleforround3
If allotted and Notallowedtovacateseat. Not allowed for further rounds of
Joined If wants to discontinue, then counseling
forfeit Advance tuition fees and pay
Discontinuation fee
Round3 If allotted and
ForfeitAdvance tuitionfees Noteligibleforstrayround
Not joined
If notallotted Eligibleforstrayvacancy
If not choice
Eligibleforstrayvacancy
locked
Notallowedtovacateseat.
If wants to discontinue, then
If allotted and
Stray forfeit
Joined
vacanc Advance tuition fees and pay Noteligiblefornextoneyear.
y Discontinuation fee
If allotted and
ForfeitAdvance tuitionfees Noteligiblefornextoneyear.
Not joined
29
ANNEXURE - I
CERTIFICATE OF NATIVITYINTAMIL NADU
Certified that Dr. ………………………………………………………………………………
S/o. D/o. W/o. Thiru…………………………………………………………………………….. an
applicant for admission to Post Graduate studies who normally resides
at ………………………………………………………………………………………… in Tamil Nadu,
isaNative ofTamil Nadu.
Taluk…………………………………………
District……………………………………….
State………………………………………….
Signature:
Nameand Designation:
Office Seal:
Station:
Date:
INSTRUCTIONSFORNATIVITY CERTIFICATE
1. This Certificate should be issued by an officer of the Revenue Department not below the rank
ofTahsildar intheTaluk concerned.
2. This Certificate should not be issued by the Special Tahsildars, Deputy Tahsildars such as
Loans, Land Acquisition, Election, Excise and HQs, Deputy Tahsildars, Special Deputy
Collectors, Assistant Commissionerof Agricultural Income, Excise, andElections etc.
3. ThisCertificate should besigned also bythe Village AdministrativeOfficer.
4. TheCertificate shouldbear the stamp oftheoffice of theOfficer signing theCertificate.
5. Any foreign national irrespective of the period of study in the State will not become eligible to
apply for this course. No certificate of Nativity in the State of Tamil Nadu, should therefore be
issued toNationals of othercountries forthis purpose.
6. The certifying officers should insist upon clear proof of the Nativity of the Parent or Guardian
ofthe candidate and satisfy themselves onthegenuineness oftheresidential qualification.
7. PermanentResidence Certificatewill notbeconsidered as Nativity Certificate.
30
8. The guidelines prescribed for the issue of Nativity Certificate and they are as follows as per
Letter No. RA.V(B)16932/2000, dated 3-4-2000 of the Special Commissioner and
CommissionerofRevenue Administration,Chepauk, Chennai-5.
(i) The parents/guardians of the applicants/students or the applicants themselves should have
permanently resided continuously for aperiod offiveyears in Tamil Nadu.
(ii) Permanently residing for a period of five years should be supported by Documentary
evidence.
(iii) The family ration card, Electoral Roll, Census List if taken recently, documents like sale
deed, tax receipt etc. relating to the property owned by either of the parents or by the
applicant may be verified.
(iv) The Transfer Certificate issued by the School authorities where the applicant had studied
last maybeverified to knowwhether he was inthestatefor fiveyears.
(v) Enquiry in the village / place of residence of the neighbour / Village Administrative
Officers regarding continuous residing.
(vi) Toensure that wrong orincorrect address had not been furnished toobtain the certificate.
(vii)The birth place, the present place of residence of the parent / father, Permanent assets,
mother tongue, place of education, place of marriage of the applicant / parents, the period
ofstay in andoutsideTamil Nadu can alsobe considered before issuing certificate.
31
ANNEXURE II
SERVICEPROFORMA
The service particulars of Dr. .............................................................................................. S/o.
D/o. W/o. Thiru ............................................................................ who is an applicant for admission to
M.D.SiddhaCourse 2025-2026 session are hereby furnished.
1. Designationof thePresent Post :
2. ServiceStatus (Tick Appropriate Box)
Probationer Approved Panchayat GOIservice Undertakings/Organisation
Probationer Union service ofGOI/ GOTN
3. DateofFirst Appointmentas TNPSCSelected :
4. Duration ofService as on31.07.2025 :
5. Detailsof posts held andplace ofservice :
Duration
Postheld Natureof Service Place
From To
(If space is not sufficient, separate sheet indicatingthe aboveparticulars should beenclosed with
thesignature and office seal of thecompetent forwarding authority)
6. If thecandidate is under any subsisting
Contractual obligation to theGovt. for any :
reason / details
PLEASE PROVIDE THE SAME.
7. Arethere anyCriminal Proceedings, Inquiry
orDisciplinary Proceedings pendingor :
Contemplatedagainst thecandidate. If so,
Registration should notbe forwarded.
8. Whether thecandidate has produced an undertaking :
Asmentioned in Prospectus Clause13.
32
9. Whether theCandidatehas worked ina hilly
area? If so, thedetails about duration ofservice
and with theplace ofpostingetc. may befurnished.
Theleave ifany, except Casual Leave, shallbe
Excluded.
Station: Signature:
Date: Office Seal:
Note: All applicants should obtain Service Certificate from the Competent Authority. Registrations
without Service Particulars duly authenticated by the competent authority are liable for rejection.
Candidatesabove50yearsason31.07.2025arenoteligibletoapply.
33
ANNEXURE-III
CERTIFICATEOF DISABILITY
Asper IndianMedicine Central Council (Post–Graduate Siddha Education)
AmendmentRegulation, 2019
For admission to M.D. Siddha Courses
Recent
Passport Size
Photograph of
CertificateNo………………….. Date………………
the candidate
Nameofthe Designated Disability Centre (as per annexure):
duly attested
This is to certify that Dr./Mr./Ms. by the issuing
authority.
/ ........………………….………………………. aged ………… Years, Son /
Daughter of Thiru………………………………………. residing
at ………………………………………………………………………………..
……………………………………………………………………………………………
AIAPGET-2025No …………………………Rank No.………………………,has the
Following Disability (Name of the Specified
Disability) ……………………………………………………. (in percentage) of ............................
(inwords) ……………………….( infigure).
 Please tick onthe“Specified Disability”
(Assessment may be done on the basis of Gazette of India. Extraordinary, Part-III, Section 4)
similarto MCInotification.
Sl. Disability Type of Specified DisabilityRange
No. Category Disabilities Disability
(5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) Eligible for Eligible for Not Eligible
M.D.(Siddha) M.D.(Siddha) for
Programme, Not Programme, Programme
Eligible for Eligible for PwD
PwDQuota Quota
1. Physical (A) Locomotor (a) Leprosy Less than 40-80% disability More than
Disability, cured Persons with more
Disability 40% 80%
including person* than 80%
(b)Cerebral
disability
Specified disability may
Palsy**
Disabilities (a also be allowed on
(c)Dwarfism
tof). case to case basis
(d) Muscular
and their function
Dystrophy
34
(e) Acid attack a in competency
victims will the aid of
(f) Other* assistive devices,
if it is being used,
**such as
to see if it is
Amputation,
brought below
Poliomyelitis,
80% and whether
etc.
they possess
sufficient motor
ability as required
to pursue and
complete the
program me
satisfactorily.
* Attention should be paid to loss of sensations in fingers and
hands, amputation, as well as involvement of eyes and
corresponding recommendations belooked at.
** Attention should be paid to impairment of vision, hearing,
Cognitive function etc. and corresponding recommendations
Be lookedat.
***Both hands intact, with intact sensations, sufficient strength
And range ofmotionare essential to be considered eligible for
M.D.(Siddha) programme.
(B) Visual (a)Blindness Less than 40% Equal to or
disability (i.e. more than
Impairment(*)
Category ‘0 40%
(10%)’ Disability
(b)Low vision
I(20%)’ (i.e.
&II (30%) Category III
and above)
(C) Hearing (a)Deaf Less than Equal to or
40% more than
Impairment@ (b)Hard of
Disability 40%
hearing
Disability
(*) Persons with Visual impairment/ visual disability of more than
40% may be made eligible to pursue Graduate M.D.(Siddha)
Education and may be given reservation, subject to the condition
that the visual disability is brought to a level of less than the
benchmark of 40% with advanced low vision aids such as
telescopes / magnifieretc.
@ Persons with hearing disability of more than 40% may be made
eligible to pursue Graduate M.D.(Siddha) Education and may be
35
given reservation, subject to the condition that the hearing
disability is brought to a level of less than the benchmark of 40%
with theaid of assistivedevices.
In addition to this, the individual should have a speech
discrimination score ofmorethan 60%.
(D)Speech & Organic/ Less than Equal to or
language Neurological 40% more than
disability causes Disability 40%
Disability
It is proposed that for admission to M.D.(Siddha) programme the Speech
Intelligibility Affected (SIA) score shall not exceed 3 (Which will correspond to less
than 40%) to be eligible to pursue the M.D.(Siddha) programme. The individuals
beyond thisscore will not beeligible foradmission to theM.D.(Siddha) programme.
Persons with an Aphasia Quotient (AQ) up to 40% may be eligible to pursue
M.D.(Siddha) programme but beyond that they will neither be eligible to pursue the
M.D.(Siddha)programme norwill they have any reservation.
2. Intellectual (a)Specific #Currently there is no Quantification scale
Learning available to assess the severity of SpLD, therefore
disability
disabilities tLheess thancuEt-qouffal to or moofre 40%
(Perceptual 40% than 40% disability
disabilities, Disability but selection will
Dyslexia, be based on the
Dyscalculia, learning
Dyspraxia & competency
D (b e )A ve u lo ti p sm mental Absence or Cevuarlrueanttelyd withntohte Equal to or
Spectrum Mild recommended due morethan60
disorders Disability, to lack of %
Asperger’s objective method disability
syndrome to establish or presence
(disability of presence and of
40-60% as extent of mental cognitive/inte
Per ISAA) illness. llectual
where the However, the disability and
individual is benefit of or if the
deemed fit for reservation/quota person is
M.D.(Siddha) may be considered deemed unfit
programme in future after for pursuing
by an expert developing better M.D.(Siddha
panel methods of )
disability programme
assessment. by an expert
panel.
36
3. Mental Mentalillness Absence or Currently not Equal to or
mild recommended due more than
Behaviour
Disability: to lack of 40%
less than 40% objective method Disability or
(under to establish if the person
IDEAS) presence and is deemed
extent of mental unfit to
illness. perform
However, the hi/her duties.
benefit of Standards
reservation/quota may be
may be considered drafted for
in future after the definite
developing better of “fitness to
methods of practice
disability medicine” as
assessment. are used by
several
institutions of
countries
other than
India.
4. Disability (a) Chronic (i)Multiple Less than 40%to 80% More than
Sclerosis 40% disability 80%
caused due Neurological
(ii)Parkinsonis Disability
to Conditions
m
(b)Blood (i)Haemophilia Less than 40%to 80% More
40% disability than80%
Disorders (ii)Thalassemia
Disability
(iii) Sickle cell
disease
5. Multiple More than one Must consider all above while deciding in
of the above individual cases recommendations with respect to
disabilities
specified presence any of the above, namely, visual,
including
disabilities Hearing, Speech & Language disability,
deaf, Intellectual Disability, and Mental Illness as a
component ofMultipleDisability.
blindness
Combining formula as notified by the related
GazetteNotification issued bytheGovt. ofIndia
a+b (90-a)
90
(Where a=higher value of disability % and
b=lower value of disability % as calculated for
different disabilities)
37
Is recommended for computing the disability
arising when more than one disabling condition is
present in a given individual. This formula may be
used in cases with multiple disabilities, and
recommendations regarding admission and/or
reservation made as per the specific disabilities
present in agiven individual
Note: For selection under PwD category, candidates will be required to produce Disability Certificate before
their schedule date of counselling from one of the disability assessment boards as designated by
concerned Authority ofGovernment ofIndia.
Conclusion: He/She is Eligible/Not Eligible for admission in Indian
Medicine courses as per the CCIM Gazette Notification subject to his being
otherwisemedically fit.
 Functional competency with the aid of Assistive devices in case of
Locomotor*/Visual*/Hearing*Impairment, ifany
Sign. &Name Sign. &Name Sign. &Name
(Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist) (Concerned Specialist)
Note:
1. The selected candidates have to undergo a second medical examination by a medical board
constituted for the purpose by the Director of Medical Education to ascertain and confirm the
natureand extentofphysically disability.
2. Thedecision ofthe DirectorofIndian Medicine and Homoeopathy inthis regard willbe final.
38
ANNEXURE - IV
DISCIPLINEDECLARATIONBYTHECANDIDATE
I________________________ undersigned, a student selected for admission
to___________________________________ course in Government Siddha Medical
College, Chennai / Palayamkottai do hereby agree to confirm from this date, I will
follow the rules and regulations including those relating to the Hostel laid down or to
be laid down hereafter by the Principal of the college for the time being for the due
maintenance of discipline at the said college and I assured that I will not join any
agitation/strike of any kind during the course of study. I further agree to make good when
calledupontodosotothe Government of Tamil Naduanydamage tofurniture, apparatus
or other articles which may be caused by any carelessness, negligence wantonly on my
part.
2. I will not indulge or participate in any kind of ragging and if found to have
indulged in ragging in the past or noticed later, I am aware that I will be removed from
the roll of the institution at whatever stage of study and criminal action will be taken
againstme.
SignatureofCandidate’sParent/Guardian SignatureoftheApplicant
39
Annexure–V
Declarationforunauthorised absenceby theCandidate
I, Dr.____________________________________________________ S/o, D/o, W/o
________________________________ do here by solemnly declare that after I join the course if I abstain
unauthorisedly from attending classes for one month or more, I agree that, I may be considered as
discontinued without notice on automatic basis and the vacancy that may arise may be filled up from the
waiting list depending upon the availability of time before the prescribed cut-off date by the Selection
committeefor P.G. Courses.
Signature of theCandidate.
40
ANNEXURE -VI
AGREEMENT BONDFOR CANDIDATESADMITTEDTO
M.D. SIDDHACOURSE2025–2026SESSIONIN
GOVT. SIDDHAMEDICAL COLLEGES, CHENNAI / PALAYAMKOTTAI.
THIS DEED OF BOND IS EXECUTED AT________________________ON THIS DAY OF
_______________BY
Name:___________________________
S/O, D/O, W/O_____________________
Residing At (Permanent Address):________________________
(Temporary Address): _________________________
Land Line PhoneNo:____________
MobileNo:______________________
email id:__________________________
AADHAR NO.____________________
IN FAVOUR OF GOVERNMENT SIDDHA MEDICAL COLLEGE, CHENNAI /
PALAYAMKOTTAI
WHEREAS the Party of the FIRST PART have applied for admission to M.D. Siddha courseand the
Party of theFIRST PART has been selected to thesaid course.
As per the Prospectus, the Party of the FIRST PART has agreed to serve the Government of
Tamil Nadu till superannuation (For Service Candidates) / for a period not less than__________ years
(For Non Service Candidates) after successful completion of the M.D. Siddha course and on such
failure of not completing the full bond period of years, the Party of the FIRST PART shall forthwith
pay asum ofRs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only).
During the above period, the Party of the FIRST PART (For Non -Service Candidates) shall
be paid Stipend and the Government of Tamil Nadu will request their services within a period of 2
years from the dateof completion oftheM.D. Siddha course.
AND WHEREAS for the better protection of the Government, the Party of the FIRST PART
has agreed to execute the bond with 3 sureties who are Income Tax assesses to stand guarantee for the
above said amount ofRs.10,00,000/-(Rupees Ten Lakhs only).
41
AND WHEREAS the Party of the FIRST PART have also agreed that on successful
completion of the M.D. Siddha course, his/ her certificates relating to M.D. Siddha course will not
be given to the Party of the FIRSTPART unless the Party of the FIRST PART successfully completes
the bond period of______________ years or pay to the Governor of Tamil Nadu his successors and
assignees (here in after called “ The Government”) on demand the sum of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees
Ten Lakhs only) and on such default together with interest at Government rates thereon from the date
ofdemand onthesaid amount.
The Party of the FIRST PART__________________________ or his/ her legal heirs,
executors and administrators shall forth with pay to the Government on demand the said sum of
Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) and on such default together with interest from the demand
at Government rates there onfrom the dateofdemand onthesaid demand onthesaid amount Loan.
AND WHEREAS the Government have , at the request of the Party of the FIRST PART
employed as granted stipend to him / her for a period of 36 months with effect from ___________in
order to enable him/her to studyat ___________________________College.
AND WHEREAS if the Party of the FIRST PART____________________________ works
for a period of less than 36 months during the M.D. Siddha course / _________________, the
proportionate amount will be treated as stipend and the Party of the FIRST PART
_______________________ shall pay back in addition to the security amount of
Rs.__________________/ - (Rupees_______________ Lakh only) with the balance amount of
stipend to theGovernment.
AND WHEREAS if the Party of the FIRST PART __________________ discontinues the
course at any time before the completion of the M.D. Siddha course the Party of the FIRST PART
shall pay back in total, amount received as stipend in addition to the discontinuation fee
Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only). in total together with interest from the demand at
Government rate in force onGovernment Loan.
AND upontheParty oftheFIRST PART_____________________or
1._____________________________or2.________________________or
3.______________________
The sureties a fore said making such payment, the above written bond shall be void and be of no
effect, otherwise itshall remain inforce andvirtue
PROVIDED always that the liability of the sureties hereunder shall not be impaired or
discharged by reasonable time being granted or by any forbearance, act or omission of the
Government or any person authorized by them (Whether with or without the consent knowledge of
42
the sureties) nor shall it be necessary for the Government to sue the Party of the FIRST PART before
suing thesureties
1.__________________________________________________
2___________________________________________and
3._________________________________
Or any ofthem for amount duehereunder.
This bond shall in all respects be Governed by the Laws of India, for the time being in force,
and the rights and liabilities shall, where necessary, be accordingly determined by the appropriate
courts in India.
This bond is exempted from stamp duty, under Article 57 of Schedule- I of the Indian Stamp
Act, 1899.(Central Act II of 1899)
NOW THE DEED OF INDEMNITY BOND WITNESSESSAS FOLLOWS:
1. The Party of the FIRST PART has agreed to serve the Government of Tamil Nadu Medical
Services for a period of on successful completion of the M.D. Siddha course
at___________________________________ and in the event of default the Party of the FIRST
PART shall pay forthwith a sum of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only).to the Government of
Tamil Nadu Medical Services.
2. For the aforesaid amount Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only). the Party of the FIRST PART
has brought 3 sureties and it should stand alive till successful completion of the ________ years bond
period with the Government by the Party of the FIRST PART. Or in the event of such default till
payment ofRs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only). is paid to the
Government ofTamil Nadu Medical Services.
3. The Party of the FIRST PART agrees that till the successful completion of the period of ________
years service to the Government of Tamil Nadu or till the payment of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten
Lakhs only) is paid the certificates relating to M.D. Siddha course
at________________________________ shall be in the custody of the Party of the Second Part
College andtheGovernment has a first lien over all the certificates gained by thecandidate at thetime
ofadmission.
43
The Party of FIRST PART authorizes for retention of the certificates till the lien is cleared /
discharged.
Signed and Dated at _____________onthis the____________dayof_____________.
Signed and delivered bytheParty oftheFIRST PART_______________.
Signature of theCandidate:
PANNo. ofSurety 1:
Aadhar No.
Signed and delivered bytheSurety _______________________________
Signature of theSurety with seal.
In the presenceof :
Witness 1. Witness 2
Name: Name:
Address: Address:
Signature Signature
PANNo. ofSurety 2:
Aadhar No.
Signed and delivered bytheSurety _______________________________
Signature of theSurety with seal.
In the presenceof :
Witness 1. Witness 2
Name: Name:
Address: Address:
Signature Signature
PANNo. ofSurety 3:
Aadhar No.
44
Signed and delivered bytheSurety _______________________________
Signature of theSurety with seal.
In the presenceof :
Witness 1. Witness 2
Name: Name:
Address: Address:
Signature Signature
ACCEPTED
For and onbehalf of anyofthe order and direction ofthe Government ofTamil Nadu.
Date :
Station :
Principal
Govt. SiddhaMedical College, Chennai / Palayamkottai.
45
LIST OF ANNEXURES
ANNEXURES Name
Annexure-I CertificateofNativityofTamilNadu
Annexure-II ServiceProforma
Annexure-III CertificateOfDisability
Annexure–IV DisciplineDeclarationbytheCandidate
Annexure-V DeclarationforunauthorisedabsencebytheCandidate
Annexure-VI AgreementBond
ForCommissionerofIndianMedicine
andHomoeopathy.
46
LIST OF COMMUNITIES
2025-2026
LIST SHOWING THE SCHEDULED CASTES,
SCHEDULED TRIBES, BACKWARD CLASSES,
BACKWARD CLASS-MUSLIMS,
MOST BACKWARD CLASSES AND
DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
IN THE
STATE OF TAMILNADU
LIST OF COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE OF
TAMILNADU LISTOF BACKWARD CLASSES, MOST
BACKWARD CLASSES, DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
THROUGH OUT THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU UNLESS AND
OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
G.O.Ms.No.85 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 29.7.2008
1.
G.O.Ms.No.96, Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 8.9.2008
2.
G.O.Ms.No.97 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 11.9.2008
3.
G.O.Ms.No.37 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 21.5.2009
4.
G.O.Ms.No.98 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes and
Minorities welfare Department dated 5.1.2009.
5.
47
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASSES
Sl.No Name of the Caste
1. Agamudayar including Thozhu or Thuluva Vellala
2. AgaramVellan Chettiar
3. Alwar, Azhavar and Alavar(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tirunelveli District.)
4. Servai (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Pudukottai Districts.)
5. Nulayar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
6. Archakarai Vellala
7. Aryavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli
District)
8. Ayira Vaisyar
9. Badagar
10. Billava
11. Bondil
12. Boyas (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The
Nilgiris, Salem, Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts).
PeddaBoyar (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts) Oddars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli,Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai,Theni and
Dindigul Districts)
Kaloddars (except Kancheepuram, Chegalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukkottai, Tiruchirappalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and
Namakkal Districts)
Nellorepet oddars (except Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts) Sooramari oddars (except Salem and Namakkal Districts)
13 Chakkala (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
48
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts)
14. Chavalakarar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
15. Chettuor Chetty (including Kottar Chetty, ElurChetty, Pathira Chetty, Valayal Chetty,
Pudukadai Chetty)(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
16. Chowdry
16(A) Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Castes irrespective of the generation of
conversion (except the Paravar conversion to Christianity of Kanniyakumari District
and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District) for the purpose of reservation of seats in
Educational Institutions and for seats in Public Services.
16(B). C.S.I formerly S.I.U.C (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tenkasi District)
17. Donga Dasaris (except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts.
18. Devangar,Sedar
19. Dombs (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur and Ariyalur
Districts)
Dommars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Thiruvannamalai Districts)
20. Enadi
21. Ezhavathy (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
22. Ezhuthachar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
23. Ezhuva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
24. Gangavar
25. Gavara, Gavarai and Vadugar (Vaduvar) (other than Kamma, Kapu, Balija and Reddi)
26. Gounder
27. Gowda (including Gammala, Kalali and Anuppa Gounder)
28. Hegde
29. Idiga
30. Illathu Pillaimar, Illuvar, Ezhuvar and Illathar
49
31. Jhetty
32. Jogis (Except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul, Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
Tiruvannamalai Districts)
33. Kabbera
34 Kaikolar, Sengunthar
35. Kaladi(exceptSivaganga,Virudhunagar,Ramanathapuram,Madurai,Theni,
Dindigul,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
36. Kalari Kurup including Kalari Panicker (in Kanniyakumari District and
Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
37. Kalingi
38. Kallar, Easanattu Kallar , Gandharva Kottai Kallars (except Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Tiruvarur, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts).
Kootappal Kallars (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and
Ariyalur Districts)
Piramalai Kallars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai,
Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and
Tiruvarur Districts) Periyasooriyur Kallars (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
39. Kallar Kula Thondaman
40. Kalveli Gounder
41. Kambar
42. Kammalar or Viswakarma, Viswakarmala (including Thattar, Porkollar, Kannar,
Karumar, Kollar, Thacher, Kal Thacher, Kamsala and Viswa brahmin.)
43. Kani, Kanisu, Kaniyar Panicker
44. Kaniyala Vellalar
45. Kannada Saineegar, Kannadiyar (Throughout the State) and Dasapalanjika
(Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur and the Nilgiris Districts)
46. Kannadiya Naidu
47. Karpoora Chettiar
50
48. Karuneegar (Seer Karuneegar, Sri Karuneegar, Sarattu Karuneegar, Kaikatti
Karuneegar, Mathuvazhi Kanakkar, Sozhi Kanakkar and Sunnambu Karuneegar)
49. Kasukkara Chettiar
50. Katesar, Pattamkatti
51. Kavuthiyar
52. Kerala Mudali
53. Kharvi
54. Khatri
55. Kongu Vaishnava
56. Kongu Vellalars( including Vellala Gounder, Nattu Gounder, Narambukkatti
Gounder, Tirumudi Vellalar, Thondu Vellalar, Pala Gounder, Poosari Gounder,
Anuppa Vellala Gounder, Padaithalai Gounder, Chendalai Gounder, Pavalankatti
Vellala Gounder, Palavellala Gounder, Sanku Vellala Gounder and Rathinagiri
Gounder).
57. Koppala Velama
58. Koteyar
59. Krishnavaka (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
60. Kudikara Vellalar
61. Kudumbi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
62. Kuga Vellalar
63. Kunchidigar
63(A) Latin Catholics except Latin Catholic Vannar in Kanniyakumari District.
63(B) Lathin Catholics in Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
64. Lambadi
65. Lingayat (Jangama)
66. Mahratta (Non-Brahmin)(including Namdev Mahratta)
67. Malayar
68. Male
69. Maniagar
70. Maravars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinum , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli and
51
Toothukudi Districts) Karumaravars, Appanad Kondayam kottai Maravar (except
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul
Districts.)
Sembanad Maravars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, and Ramanathapuram
Districts)
71. Moondrumandai Enbathunalu (84) Ur.Sozhia Vellalar
72. Mooppan
73. Muthuraja, Muthiriyar, Muttiriyar, Mutharaiyar
74. Nadar, Shanar and Gramani including Christian Nadar, Christian Shanar and
Christian Gramani.
75. Nagaram
76. Naikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
77. Nangudi Vellalar
78. Nanjil Mudali (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
79. Odar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
80. Odiya
81. Oottruvalanattu Vellalar
82. O.P.S.Vellalar
83. Ovachar
84. Paiyur Kotta Vellalar
85. Pamulu
86. Panar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
86A Pandiya Vellalar
87 -Omitted-
88. Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District
89. Pannirandam Chettiar or Uthama Chettiar
90. Parkavakulam (including Surithimar, Nathamar, Malayamar, Moopanar and Nainar)
91. Perike (including PerikeBalija)
92. Perumkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
52
93. Podikara Vellalar
94. Pooluva Gounder
95. Poraya
96. Pulavar (in Coimbatore and Tiruppur Districts)
97. Pulluvar or Pooluvar
98. Pusala
99. Reddy (Ganjam)
100. Sadhu Chetty (including Telugu Chetty, Twenty four Manai Telungu Chetty)
101. Sakkaravar or Kavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District )
102. Salivagana
103. Saliyar, Padmasaliyar, Pattusaliyar, Pattariyar and Adhaviyar
104. Savalakkarar
105. Senaithalaivar, Senaikudiyar and Illaivaniar
105A Serakula Vellalar
106. Sourashtra (Patnulkarar)
107. Sozhiavellalar (including Sozha Vellalar, Vetrilaikarar, Kodikalkarar and Keeraikarar)
108. Srisayar
109. Sundaram Chetty
109A Thiyya
110. Thogatta Veerakshatriya
111. Tholkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
112. Tholuva Naicker and Vetalakara Naicker
113 -Omitted-
114. Thoriyar
115. Ukkirakula Kshatriya Naicker
116. Uppara, Uppillia and Sagara
117. Urali Gounder ( except Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur and
Pudukottai District) and Orudaya Gounder or Oorudaya Gounder (in
Madurai ,Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur ,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Salem and Namakkal Districts )
53
118. Urikkara Nayakkar
118A Virakodi Vellala
119 Vallambar
119.A Vallanattu Chettiar
120. Valmiki
121. Vaniyar, Vania Chettiar (including Gandla, Ganika, Telikula and Chekkalar)
122. Veduvar and Vedar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tenkasi District where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
123. Veerasaiva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
124. Velar
125. Vellan Chettiar
126. Veluthodathu Nair (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
Vokkaligar (including Vakkaligar, Okkaligar, Kappiliyar, Kappiliya, Okkaliga
127.
Gowda, Okkaliya- Gowder, Okkaliya Gowda )
128. Wynad Chetty (The Nilgiris District)
Yadhava (including Idaiyar, Telugu Speaking Idaiyar known as Vaduga Ayar or
129.
Vaduga Idaiyar or Golla and Asthanthra Golla)
130. Yavana
131. Yerukula
Converts to Christianity from any Hindu Backward Classes Community or Most
Backward Classes Community or Denotified Communities (except the Converts to
131A
Christianity from Meenavar, Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar,
Mukkuvar or Mukayar and Paravar)
Orphans and destitute children who have lost their parents before reaching the age of
ten and are destitutes; and who have nobody else to take care of them either by law or
132. custom; and also who are admitted into any of the schools or orphanages run by the
Government or recognized by the Government.
54
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASS MUSLIMS
1. Ansar
2. Dekkani Muslims
3. Dudekula
4. Labbais including Rowthar and Marakayar (whether their spoken language is Tamil or
Urdu)
5. Mapilla
6. Sheik
7. Syed
LIST OF MOST BACKWARDS CLASSES COMMUNITIES
1 Ambalakarar
2 Andipandaram
2(A) Arayar (in Kanniyakumari District)
3 Bestha, Siviar
4 Bhatraju (other than Kshatriya Raju)
5 Boyar, Oddar
6 Dasari
7 Dommara
8 Eravallar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District where the community is a Scheduled Tribe )
9 Isaivellalar
10 Jambuvanodai
11 Jangam
12 Jogi
13 Kongu Chettiar (in Coimbatore and Erode Districts only)
14 Koracha
15 Kulala (including Kuyavar and Kumbarar)
16 Kunnuvar Mannadi
55
17 Kurumba, Kurumba Gounder
18 Kuruhini Chetty
18(A) Latin Catholic Christian Vannar (in Kanniyakumari District)
19 Maruthuvar, Navithar, Mangala, Velakattalavar, Velakatalanair and Pronopakari
20 Mond Golla
21 Moundadan Chetty
22 Mahendra, Medara
23 Mutlakampatti
24 Narikoravar (Kurivikars)
25 Nokkar
25(A) Panisaivan/Panisivan
Vanniakula Kshatriya (including Vanniyar, Vanniya, Vannia Gounder, Gounder or
26
Kander, Padayachi, Palli and Agnikula Kshatriya)
27 Paravar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
where the Community is a Scheduled Caste)
27A Paravar converts to Christianity including the Paravar converts to Christianity of
Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk in Tenkasi District.
28 Meenavar (Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar) (including converts to
Christianity )
29 Mukkuvar or Mukayar (including converts to Christianity)
30 Punnan Vettuva Gounder
31 Pannayar (other than Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District)
32 Sathatha Srivaishnava (including Sathani, Chattadi and Chattada Srivaishnava)
33 Sozhia Chetty
34 Telugupatty Chetty
35 Thottia Naicker ( including Rajakambalam, Gollavar, Sillavar, Thockalavar ,
Thozhuva Naicker and Erragollar)
36 Thondaman
36(A) Thoraiyar (Nilgris)
36(B) Thoraiyar (Plains)
36(C) Transgender or Eunuch (Thirunangai or Aravani)
56
37 Valaiyar (including Chettinad Valayars)
38 Vannar (Salavai Thozhilalar)(including Agasa, Madivala, Ekali, Rajakula, Veluthadar
and Rajaka) (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
39 Vettaikarar
40 Vettuva Gounder
41 Yogeeswarar
LIST OF DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
1 Attur Kilnad Koravars (Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore, Villupuram, kallakurichi,
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga and Virudhunagar Districts)
2 Attur Melnad Koravars (Salem and Namakkal District)
3 Appanad Kondayamkottai Maravar (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram,
Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts )
4 Ambalakarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
5 Ambalakkarar (Suriyanur, Tiruchirapalli District)
6 Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem,
Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts)
7 Battu Turkas
8 C.K.Koravars (Cuddalore, Villupuram and Kallakurichi Districts)
9 Chakkala (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur,
Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and the Nilgiris Districts)
10 Changyampudi Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
11 Chettinad Valayars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
12 Dombs (Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
13 Dobba Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
14 Dommars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
57
15 Donga Boya
16 Donga Ur.Korachas
17 Devagudi Talayaris
18 Dobbai Korachas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts )
19 Dabi Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
Tiruvannamalai Districts )
20 Donga Dasaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
21 Gorrela Dodda Boya
22 Gudu Dasaris
23 Gandarvakottai Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Cuddalore, Villupuram and
Kallakurichi Districts)
24 Gandarvakottai Kallars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and
Pudukottai Districts)
25 Inji Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
26 Jogis (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Chennai, Cuddalore, Villupuram,
Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
27 Jambavanodai
28 Kaladis (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts )
29 Kal Oddars (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli,
Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
30 Koravars (Kancheepuram , Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram,
58
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Pudukottai,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai,
Thiravarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi,
Thoothukadi, Chennai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts )
31 Kalinji Dabikoravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and
Pudukottai Districts)
32 Kootappal Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
33 Kala Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
34 Kalavathila Boyas
35 Kepmaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur
Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts )
36 Maravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi and Toothukudi
Districts)
37 Monda Koravars
38 Monda Golla (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
39 Mutlakampatti (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalaur and Pudukottai Districts)
40 Nokkars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
41 Nellorepet Oddars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
42 Oddars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts)
43 Pedda Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
44 Ponnai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
45 Piramalai Kallars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur
Districts)
46 Peria Suriyur Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalurand Pudukottai
Districts)
47 Padayachi (Vellayan Kuppam in Cuddalore District and Tennore in Tiruchirapalli
District )
59
48 Punnan Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts )
49 Servai (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
50 Salem Melnad Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur,
Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Salem, Namakkal,
Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
51 Salem Uppu Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
52 Sakkaraithamadai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts)
53 Saranga Palli Koravars
54 Sooramari Oddars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
55 Sembanad Maravars (Sivaganga, Virudunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
56 Thalli Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
57 Telungapatti Chetis (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
58 Thottia Naickers (Sivaganga , Virudunagar, Ramanathapuram, Kancheepuram,
Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi,
Thoothukudi, Salem, Namakkal, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet, Tiruvannamalai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
59 Thogamalai Koravars or Kepmaris (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur
and Pudukottai Districts)
60 Uppukoravars or Settipalli Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam , Mayiladuthurai,
Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
Tiruvannamalai Districts)
61 Urali Gounders (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
62 Wayalpad or Nawalpeta Korachas
63 Vaduvarpatti Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur,
60
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
64 Valayars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur
Pudukottai, Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
65 Vettaikarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai
Districts)
66 Vetta Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
67 Varaganeri Koravars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
68 Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED CASTES)
1 Adi Andhra
2 Adi Dravida
3 Adi Karnataka
4 Ajila
5 Aruthathiyar
6 Ayyanavar (in Kanyakumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
7 Baira
8 Bakuda
9 Bandi
10 Bellara
11 Bharata (In Kanykumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District.
12 Chakkiliyan
13 Chalavadi
14 Chamar, Muchi
15 Chandala
16 Cheruman
17 Devendrakula Velalar (Devendrakulanathan, Kadaiyan (excluding in the coastal
areas of Tirunalveli, thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai, Thanjavur,
61
Tiruvarur and Nagapattinam district), Kalladi, Kudumban, Pallan, Pannadi,
Vathiriyan)
18 Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano
19 Domban
20 Godagali
21 Godda
22 Gosangi
23 Holeya
24 Jaggali
25 Jambuvulu
26 Kadaiyan (in the districts of Tirunelveli, Thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram,
Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Tiruvarrur and Nagapattinam)
27 Kakkalan (in kanyakumari districts and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
28 -Omitted-
29 Kanakkan, Padanna (in the Nilgiris district)
30 Karimpalan
31 Kavara (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
32 Koliyan
33 Koosa
34 Kootan, Koodan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
district)
35 -Omitted-
36 Kuravan, Sidhanar
37 Madari
38 Madiga
39 Maila
40 Mala
41 Mannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
42 Mavilan
43 Mager
44 Mundala
62
45 Nalakeyava
46 Nayadi
47 Padannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
48 Pagadi
49 -Omitted-
50 Palluvan
51 Pambada
52 Panan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
53 Panchama
54 -Omitted-
55 Panniandi
56 Paraiyan, Parayan, Sambavar
57 Paravan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
58 Pathiyan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
59 Pulayan, Cheramar
60 Puthirai Vannan
61 Raneyar
62 Samagara
63 Samban
64 Sapari
65 Semman
66 Thandan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
67 Thoti
68 Tiruvalluvar
69 Vallon
70 Valluvan
71 Vannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
72 -Omitted-
73 Velan
74 Vetan (in Kanyakumari and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
63
75 Vettiyan
76 Vettuvan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah of Tirunelvelli district)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED TRIBES) TAMILNADU
1. Adiyan
2. Aranadan
3. Eravallan
4. Irular.
5. Kadar
Kammara (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
6.
District).
Kanikaran, Kanikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah and
7.
Ambasamudram taluk of Tirunelveli District).
8. Kaniyan, Kanyan.
9. Kattunayakan.
10. Kochu Velan.
11. Konda Kapus.
12. Kondareddis.
13. Koraga.
14. Kota (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
District).
15. Kudiya, Melakudi.
16. Kurichchan.
17. Kurumbas (in the Nilgiris District).
18. Kurumans.
19. MahaMalasar.
20. MalaiArayan.
21. MalaiPandaram.
22. Malai Vedan.
64
23. Malakkuravan.
24. Malasar.
25. Malayali (in Dharmapuri, Vellore, Pudukottai, Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore,
Tiruvannamalai, Villupuram, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur Districts).
26. Malayakandi.
27. Mannan.
28. Mudugar,Muduvan.
29. Muthuvan.
30. Pallayan.
31. Palliyan.
32. Palliyar.
33. Paniyan.
34. Sholaga.
35. Toda (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
District).
36. Uraly.
65