GOVERNMENT OFTAMIL NADU
PROSPECTUS
FORADMISSIONTO
POSTGRADUATE DEGREE COURSES INUNANI
[M.D. (UNANI)]
INGOVERNMENT UNANI MEDICAL COLLEGE
2025–2026Session
(As perG.O.(D) No.1144, Health andFamilyWelfare [IM1-2]
Department,dated 14.10.2025andas amended fromtimeto time).
LASTDATE FORONLINE REGISTRATIONOF APPLICATIONIS
22.10.2025BEFORE 5.00PM.
SELECTIONCOMMITTEEOFFICE,
COMMISSIONERATEOF INDIAN MEDICINE AND HOMOEOPATHY,
ARIGNAR ANNAGOVERNMENT HOSPITAL OF INDIAN MEDICINE CAMPUS,
ARUMBAKKAM, CHENNAI-600106.
Website:www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in
www.tnayushselection.org
For any Queries, pleasecontact 044-26216244.
1
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
1 Date ofNotification 18-10-2025
2 Date of Commencement of online18-10-2025
application
3 Last date for submission of Special22-10-2025 upto 5:00P.M.
Category Application
4 Last date for online submission of22-10-2025upto 5:00P.M.
application
5 Date ofdeclaration ofRank list Willbe posted inthe official website.
6 Details ofcounselling Willbe posted inthe official website.
7 Period of downloading of AllotmentWillbe posted inthe official website.
Order
CounsellingforSpecial Category: Selection Committee,
8
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine &
InPerson Only
Homoeopathy,
Arignar Anna Government Hospital of Indian
MedicineCampus,
Arumbakkam, Chennai –600106.
9 Official website www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in,
www.tnayushselection.org
10 HelplineNumber 044-26216244
2
Sl.No. IMPORTANT INFORMATIONS
1. Candidates seeking admission to Post Graduate Degree MD (Unani) Course in
Government Unani Medical College, Chennai, affiliated to the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R.
Medical University, for the academic session 2025-2026 can be accessed from the
following official websites: www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org,
The application submission, fees payment and counselling for MD (Unani) will be
ONLINE forthe academicyear 2025-2026.
2. Any change or modification and relevant information pertaining to MD (Unani)
Admission process will be made available on the official websites:
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org.
3. The candidates are instructed to visitthe websiteat least two times a day for updates from
the date of issue of application till the end of admission process without fail. Selection
Committee will not be responsible for consequences resulting due to non-diligent follow-
up of notification and publications appearing on the website regarding admission to Post
GraduateDegree -MD(Unani) Coursefor theacademicyear 2025-2026.
4. Candidates are advised to read the information bulletin for AIAPGET-2025 (Unani)
issued by National Testing Agency (NTA) AIAPGET-2025 Authority and to carefully go
through the instructions regarding AIAPGET-2025 (Unani) and visit the website
www.ntaaiapget.nic.in or https://aaccc.gov.in/aacccpg/unani regarding detailed qualifying
criteria for admissionto PostGraduate Degree Courses 2025-2026 session.
5. REGISTRATIONFEE
a. The registration fee for online application for M.D. (Unani) is Rs. 3,000/- (Rupees
Three Thousand Only), which is non-refundable. It should be paid through the online
bankpayment portal available in thewebsite.
b. All “SC/SCA/ST candidates who are natives of Tamil Nadu are exempted from
payment of theregistration fee for application
c. The last date for submission of online registration form will be up to 5:00 P.M.
on 22.10-2025. Thereafter there is no provision for the candidates to submit their online
application form.
6. ONLINEPROCESSING FEE
All Candidates who want to participate in the Online counselling will have to remit a
non-refundable amount of Rs.1000/- (Rupees OneThousand only) via online portal, as
onlineprocessing fee before choicefilling.
3
7. PAYMENTDETAILS:
Description OC/BC/BCM/MBC SC/SCA/ST TIME
Registration fee for
3000 Exempted Whileapplying
onlineapplication
OnlineProcessing fee 1000 Before choice filling
At the time of
Advance Tuition fee 5000
Choicelocking.
 After the receipt of the joining report from the Principal of the Government Unani
Medical College, Chennai the advance tuition fees amount will be transferred to the
College to get adjusted with theTuition Fees tobepaid bythecandidates.
 If the candidate fails to join the course after getting allotment order within the
stipulated date and time, he/she will forfeit the advance tuition fee amount as well as
the seat allotted.
8. The candidates allotted to M.D. (Unani) course through Selection Committee,
Commissionerate of Indian Medicine, and Homoeopathy, Arumbakkam,
Chennai, will alone be registered for M.D. (Unani) Course in The Tamil Nadu
Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai.
4
I. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
1. All the candidate should ensure their eligibility criteria before submitting the online
application form. The candidates are instructed to go through the Prospectus carefully
and be clear about all the instructions with regard to the submission of the online
application form.
2. The application form other than the one filled in online mode will not be accepted, under
any circumstances.
3. a. Candidates should fill up all mandatory columns, upload all required documents and
submit the duly filled in online application. The candidates may download their filled in
online application form and secure a copy of the same for their future reference.
Subsequent submission of supporting document(s), is not accepted either on courier /
post /orin person.
b. Scanned PDF copies of all original certificates must be uploaded during filling the
online application form. The original certificates should be submitted in person only at
thetimeofadmissionintherespectivecollege.
4. Service candidates should upload their service particulars as per Annexure – II (Service
Proforma) duly certified by the forwarding authority with date and seal along with the
filled in onlineapplication form. They should submit their hard copy of duly filled online
Application only through the proper channel with the remarks of the forwarding
authorities in the format prescribed in the application form to the Secretary, Selection
Committee, Commissionerate of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy. It should
compulsorily reach on or before the last date as mentioned above. If not,applications will
be summarily rejected irrespective of the date of submission by the applicant and date
of forwarding by the competent authority. Advance copies from the service candidates
willnotbeaccepted.
5. Same passport-size photograph used in AIAPGET 2025 (Unani) should be uploaded
inthe space provided.
6. A list of eligible candidates will be uploaded in the official websites
www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org along with their corresponding
Application RegisterNumber (A.R. No.).
7. All information pertaining to M.D. (Unani) admission will be notified in the official
websites www.tnhealth.tn.gov.in, www.tnayushselection.org from time to time for
updates regarding PG provisional rank list, the Online Counselling Schedule and other
5
information / intimations, etc. The Selection Committee will not be held responsible if
any candidate fails to register or fails to lock the seat during online counselling due to
ignorance of updates published on the website. No individual correspondence will be
entertained in thisregard.
8. UNAUTHORISEDABSENCE:
In case of unauthorized absence of candidate for one month or more after getting
admitted to the Course, the candidate will be treated as having discontinued without
notice and the vacancy will be filled up from the waiting list depending on the
availability of time before the prescribed cut-off date. Candidates will have to give a
declaration to this effect at the time of admission as in Annexure – V. If the period of
absence is beyond the stipulated date as specified by Selection Committee, the candidate
mustpay thediscontinuationfee as perclause 41(ii)of thisprospectus.
9. Note forSpecial Category:Persons with Benchmark Disability (PwBD)
a. The candidates applying under PwBD is instructed to submit their required document
as per Annexure-III through online and hard copy should be sent to Selection
Committee along with the details of their application registration number after final
submission.
b. At the time of filling the online application, it is mandatory to upload the necessary
supportive documents as mentioned in Annexure-III (with Full Size Photograph
exhibitingthedeformity).
c. Special Category rank differs completely from that oftheGeneral Category rank.
d. Special Category candidates cannot claim the same rank in the General Category and
viceversa.
e. Candidates are requested to produce a Certificate from the District Medical Board of
the district concernedconstitutedforthis purposeassessingthenatureandtheextentof
physical disability in the format prescribed in the Annexure-III. The candidate must
have obtained the certificate within3monthspriortosubmissionoftheregistrationfor
seeking admission under this category. If the certificate has been obtained earlier, the
application will be rejected. The candidates seeking admission under this category
shouldproducethefull-size photograph exhibiting the deformity.
f. The candidates applied for M.D. (Unani) course will have to be required to undergo
medical examination in person by a Medical Board constituted for the purpose by the
Directorate of Medical Education to ascertain and confirm the nature and extent of
6
physicaldisability.
g. The Counselling for the Special Categories will be done in offline mode before the
General Category Online Counselling at Selection Committee, Commissionerate of
Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy, Arignar Anna Government Hospital of
IndianMedicineCampus, Arumbakkam, Chennai 106.
h. Counsellingdatefor Special Category will beintimated inthewebsite.
i. The claim under Special Category will not be considered, under any circumstances
without the required documents and the application of such candidate shall be
considered under General Category only, if candidate fulfils the norms for the
General Category.
j. If adequate number of eligible candidates is not available under Special Category,
then the earmarked seats will be reverted back to general category and filled up with
candidates onthebasis ofmerit and communal rotation.
II.ELIGIBILITYFORADMISSION
10. a. A person possessing the degree of Unani (Tabeeb Kamil) (Bachelor of Unani Medicine
and Surgery) from the Tamil Nadu Dr. MGR Medical University or from any other
recognized University or Board or Medical Institution specified in erstwhile Indian
Medicine Central Council Act 1970 or National Commission for Indian System of
Medicine Act, 2020, and enrolled in Central Council of Indian System of Medicine or
Tamil Nadu Board of Indian Medicine, with successful completion of CRRI before
31.07.2025bytheNCISM / AIAPGET-2025.
b. The candidates should fulfil the eligibility criteria for applying AIAPGET 2025;
should have qualified in AIAPGET-2025 and should have obtained minimum of marks at
50th percentile. Provided that in respect of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Most Backward Classes and Denotified Community, Backward
Classes (Muslim) and Backward Classes; the minimum marks shall be at 40th percentile;
for candidates with benchmark disabilities specified under the Rights of persons with
disabilities Act, 2016, the minimum marks shall be at 45th percentile for the General
Category and 40th percentile for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Most Backward
Classes and Denotified Community, Backward Classes (Muslim)and Backward classes.
Note: Provided further that when sufficient number of candidates in the respective
categories fail to secure minimum marks in the All India AYUSH Post graduate Entrance
Test (AIAPGET), as specified above, held for any academic year for admission to Post –
7
Graduate courses, the Central Government in consultation with the Council may at its
discretion lower the minimum marks required for admission to Post – Graduate Course
for candidates belonging to respective categories and marks so lowered by the Central
Government shallbe applicable forthat academic year only.
11. The candidate should produce the Degree Certificate or the Provisional Certificate-II
issued by the Affiliating University and Medical Registration Certificate issued by
Central Council of Indian System of Medicine or Tamil Nadu Board of Indian Medicine,
Chennai, in Original, at thetimeof joining inCollege.
12. The Candidate should be a Citizen of India and a native of Tamil Nadu and should have
undergone B.U.M.S. Courseinthe StateofTamil Nadu.
Candidates of Tamil Nadu nativity who have completed B.U.M.S. Course in other
States shall furnish a Certificate of Nativity in Tamil Nadu issued by a competent
authority only in the specified format prescribed in the ANNEXURE-I and should
upload the Eligibility Certificate from the Tamil Nadu Dr. M. G. R. Medical University,
Chennai and submitthesame totheCollege at thetimeofjoining.
Candidates from other States who have studied B.U.M.S. Course continuously in Tamil
NaduwillbeconsideredundertheOpenCategory.
Submission of a false Nativity Certificate, if detected at any stage during the course of
study, will result in expulsion of the candidate and initiation of criminal proceedings
againstthecandidateandtheirparents,asperthelaw.
Nativity Certificates Previously obtained or e-Nativity Certificates in the latest updated
format issued by an authority not below the rank of Zonal Deputy Tahsildar of the
concernedRevenueJurisdictionwillbeaccepted.
Community Certificates issued by other States will not be considered for reservation.
SuchcandidateswillbetreatedundertheOpenCategory.
Candidates who are claiming community reservation of Tamil Nadu should upload both
following certificates,
i. Community Certificate issued by competent authority from Revenue Department
ofTamil Nadu Government with official seal; and
ii. Community Certificate of either of their Parents issued by competent authority
from Revenue Department ofTamil Nadu Government with official seal.
8
13. Candidates must fill their AIAPGET - 2025 (Unani) Hall Ticket Roll Number, Marks
scored and All India Rank in the relevant fields of the registration form. The original
Hall Ticket and Marks Statement mustbe produced at thetimeofjoining.
14. NOT ELIGIBLE
 Candidates who join a Post Graduate Degree [MD (Unani)] in any branch and
discontinue the Course on any grounds after the cutoff date fixed by NCISM are not
eligibleto applyfortwosubsequentacademic years.
 Candidates who have completed a Post Graduate Degree [MD (Unani)] or the
Candidates who possess a Post Graduate Degree [MD (Unani)] in one Specialty /
Branch of study are not eligible to apply for admission to any other Post Graduate
Degree i.e., in anyother branches.
 List of Candidates notified / intimated as NOT Eligible by AYUSH Admissions
Central Counselling Committee(AACCC)from timetotime.
III.DEFINITIONOFSERVICECANDIDATES&NON-SERVICE CANDIDATES
15. SERVICECANDIDATES:
The following categories of Unani Medical Graduates only will be treated as Service
candidates and considered for selection against 50% of seats reserved exclusively for
Service Candidates
(i) Unani Medical Graduates who were selected by the Tamil Nadu Public Service
Commission / Medical Services Recruitment Board and other regularized
service candidates and appointed in the Tamil Nadu Medical Service on regular
basis, who have put in minimum of TWO years satisfactory and continuous
service excluding leave period such as Earned Leave, Unearned Leave on
Medical Certificate, Unearned Leave on Private Affairs, Maternity Leave and
any other unauthorized absence, as on 31.07.2025 either in Tamil Nadu
Medical Serviceorlocal bodies and StateOrganizations.
(ii) Candidates above 50years as on31.07.2025are not eligible to apply.
(iii) UnaniMedical Graduates whoare approved Probationers and who are working
a. As Medical Officers working (continuously for two years) in Local Bodies in
Tamil Nadu. A Doctor absorbed from the Panchayat Union into Government
Service as per G.O.Ms. No 435 / H&FW / IMI-2 Dept. dated: 23-11-2000 will
be considered as Service Candidates provided that they should have completed 2
years ofservice.
9
b. In Government ofIndia Institutions in theStateofTamil Nādu.
c. In PublicSectorUndertaking andOrganizations under theControl of
Government ofIndiain Tamil Nadu.
d. In undertaking ororganization ofGovernment ofTamil Nadu.
Note:
The candidates under Clause 15, sub clause (ii) item (a) to (d) above should give an
undertaking to theconcerned authorities that they will serve for 5years in theirrespective
institutions after the completion of course. They should produce a certificate from the
concerned authority to show that they have given such an undertaking as per Tamil Nadu
Government rules.
16. NON-SERVICECANDIDATES
The following category of Unani Medical Graduates will be treated as Non- Service
Candidates.
a. Private Unani Practitioners Registered under Tamil Nadu Board of Indian
Medicine.
b. Those service candidates selected by TNPSC / MSRB who have put in less
than two years of continuous regular service as on 31.07.2025 will be treated
as non-Service candidates.
c. All others who have put in less than two years of State Government Service or
who are working in Central Government, Public Sector Undertaking, Central
Government Health Scheme (CGHS), Local bodies, National Rural Health
Mission and Municipalities in Tamil Nadu and Tamil Nadu Government
Undertakings and Organizations willbe treated as non-Service candidates.
17. PROCEDURE FOR FILLING AND SUBMISSION OF ONLINE APPLICATION
FORM
 Candidates are advised to download the Prospectus from the official website and
read it thoroughly before filling the online registration form for the academic year
2025–2026.
 Thecandidate should login totheofficial website: www.tnayushselection.org
 Registration forms will be available online from 18-10-2025 to 22-10-2025 up to
5:00P.M.
 Candidates should pay a non-refundable registration fee of Rs.3,000/- (Rupees
Three Thousand only) towards application form through the online payment
10
portal.
I. General Instructions
 Allmandatory fields in application must becompleted.
 Relevant documents should be uploaded in PDF format except photo and
signature.
 Thecompleted registration mustbe submittedonlineafter verifying all details.
 No request for changes in any particulars will be entertained after the
application has beensubmitted.
II.Documents to beUploaded
Candidates must upload scanned PDFcopies ofthefollowing original certificates:
 AIAPGET (Unani) 2025Admit Card and ScoreCard
 ClassX Mark Sheet (both sides)or Birth Certificate
 B.U.M.S. Final Year Mark Sheet
 TransferCertificate obtained after completion ofB.U.M.S.
 CommunityCertificate (if applicable)
 NativityCertificate (if applicable)
 Eligibility Certificate from The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University
(for candidates who studied B.U.M.S. in other University/State)
 CRRICompletionCertificate
 Registration Certificate
 DegreeorProvisional Certificate
 Samepassport sizephotograph used inAIAPGET-2025 (Unani)
 Signature in running handwriting. Initials or full name in capital letters are not
accepted.
 Anyothersupporting document (if applicable)
Note:
 Ensure thephotograph and signature are uploaded in thecorrect fields.
 After submission, candidates are advised to download and keep a copy of the
filled-in onlineregistration for future reference.
 The Original certificates must be produced at the time of Admission in
college.
11
III. DeclarationandVerification
 All entries in the online registration form must be filled carefully by the
candidate.
 The candidate must ensure that all information, including academic marks and
uploaded documents, are trueand accurate.
 If any discrepancy is found during scrutiny:
a. The candidate will forfeit their admission, regardless of the stage of the
course.
b. The candidate will be debarred from pursuing any other course for a period
ofthree years
c. Legal/criminal action will be initiated against the candidate for submitting
false documents (e.g., Mark Sheet, Degree Certificate, Community
Certificate, Nativity Certificate, etc.).
IV. InstructionsforFilling the OnlineApplicationForm
a. The candidate must verify eligibility before submitting the application form.
b. Only Application submitted trough online will be accepted. Application submitted
through any other modewillbe rejected.
V. Accessing andFillingthe OnlineApplicationForm:
1.Visittheofficial website: www.tnayushselection.org
2.Enterthefollowing particulars intheonlineapplication form:
Name oftheCandidate
o
Name ofParent/Guardian
o
Permanent and Communication Address
o
Date ofBirth
o
Gender
o
Nationality and Nativity
o
Religion
o
Community, Caste, and related details
o
AadhaarNumber
o
AIAPGET (UNANI) Roll Number, Register Number, Score, and Rank
o
Name ofCollege and University forB.U.M.S.
o
12
Totalmarks obtained in final year BUMS
o
MotherTongue
o
CivicDetails
o
NativeDistrict
o
 EligibilityCertificate (ifapplicable)
 Any other document (optional, ifapplicable)
 Upload:
 Passport sizephotograph recently taken (size50KB to 100KB).
 Signature in running handwriting (size 10 KB to 50 KB). Initials or full name
in capital letters are not accepted.
 Ensure thephotograph and signature are uploaded in thecorrect fields.
VI. ImportantPoints
 Only oneapplication should be submitted byacandidate.
 Ensureall information and documents are accurate at thetimeofsubmission.
 Incomplete application or application without mandatory enclosures will be
rejected.
 Registration fee towards application form once paid is non-refundable.
 Application once submitted cannot bewithdrawn.
18. METHODOF FEEPAYMENT:
i. ModeofPayment:
The application and course fees should be paid through Debit Cards (except Visa /
Master Card), Credit Card, Net Banking, UPI, or Digital Wallets (such as Google Pay,
Paytm, etc.). Necessary facilities for payment have been integrated into the online
payment portal.
ii. ImportantNote:
Mere deduction of the amount from the bank account will not be considered as proof
of successful fee payment. Candidates must ensure that the payment confirmation is
received and that the registration statusreflects thesuccessful transaction.
iii. PreparationBefore Payment:
Beforeproceeding withpayment, candidates are advised to:
a. Check thevalidityof theirDebit/Credit Card.
b. Keep necessary banking orpayment information readily available.
13
c. Enter all requisitedetails whilemaking thepayment ontheportal carefully.
iv.RefundofAdvance TuitionFees:
The candidates withdrawing on or before the stipulated date and time of joining in
Round 1 and Round 2, the advance tuition fee will be refunded only to the bank account
for which details are provided at the time of application. Candidates are advised to ensure
that the account details entered in the online application form are accurate and belong to
them.
19. DURATIONOFM.D. (Unani)COURSE:
Theduration of theMD(Unani) course willbe for threeyears.
IV. MODE OF SELECTIONAND ADMISSION
20. A Provisional Rank List of eligible candidates will be prepared based on the marks and
rank obtained in AIAPGET– 2025 (Unani). Admission to the M.D. (Unani) Course will
bemade strictlyfrom thisrank listonly.
The Secretary, Selection Committee will publish the provisional rank list on the
official website: www.tnayushselection.org
Tie-BreakingCriteria (Inter-seMerit):
If two or more candidates have secured the same number of marks, the tie shall be
resolved and inter-se merit shall be determined based on the higher rank in AIAPGET-
2025(Unani).
21. i. Non-Service candidates:
Admission to the Course will be made purely on merit, based on the marks obtained in
theAIAPGET-2025(Unani).
ii. Service Candidates:
Admission to the Course will be made, based on the marks obtained in the AIAPGET-
2025(Unani) and additional weightage marks awarded to eligible in-service candidates.
One mark will be awarded for each completed year of Government Service. Two marks
will be awarded for each completed year of Government Service in Hill areas and it will
be limited to maximum of 10 marks, as per G.O.(Ms)No.320 Health and Family Welfare
[IM 1-2] Department, dated : 26.09.2023.
22. ALLOTMENTOF SEATS:
Rule of Reservation will be 200 point roster as per Government of Tamil Nadu as
14
thenumber ofseats isless than 8ineach branch.
23. SEATSRESERVEDFORSERVICE CANDIDATES
50% of seats in each specialty are reserved for Service Candidates, in addition to
those service candidates selected in the Open Category. In case an odd number of seats
remains in any specialty in the total seats sanctioned for that specialty, that seat shall be
allotted toOpen Category and willbe filled based onMerit and Communal rotation.
24. Candidates will be allowed to choose their Branch of Study at the time of choice filling,
subject to the availability of vacancy in that branch in the college, when the candidate
gets his / her turn. Branch once opted and allotted at the time of online Counselling shall
be final and will not be allowed to change subsequently underany circumstances in the
same Round. However, if vacancy arises in the next Round, the candidate can upgrade
himself/herself and avail the seat in another Branch and College upto Round-3. No
transfer from one branch to another branch will be allowed during the course period of 3
years.
25. Total Numberof seats: 12
SEATSALLOTTEDTO/ RESERVEDFOR SPECIAL CATEGORIES
Persons with Benchmark Disability (PwBD)*
Govt. Unani Medical College, Chennai : 1Seat
The Persons with Benchmark Disability (PwBD) should obtain Certificate from
Designated Disability Centre such as Madras Medical College/ Rajiv Gandhi Govt.
Hospital, Chennai.
The decision of the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy will be final in
thisregard.
Nameof theBranch Total Seats Available
Moalajat (General Medicine) 4*
Ilaj Bid Tadbeer (Regimen Therapy) 4*
IlmulAdvia (Unani Pharmacology) 4*
Total 12*
Govt. UnaniMedical College, Chennai;Total SanctionedSeats: 12*
Speciality Sanctioned AllIndia State
Seats Quota (AIQ )* Quota
Moalajat (General Medicine) 4* 1* 3*
Ilaj Bid Tadbeer (Regimen Therapy) 4* 0* 4*
15
IlmulAdvia (Unani Pharmacology) 4* 1* 3*
Total 12* 2* 10*
Detail Total
Total Sanctioned Strength 12*
All India Quota 15%Surrendered Seats 2*
StateQuotaSeats (85% )
i. General Category 9*
ii. Special Category 1*
PwD 5% (Persons with Benchmark
Disability)
The above seats are tentative, subject to change as per Dept. of AYUSH,
Government of India, NCISM and Seat Matrix received for Tamil Nadu Dr. MGR
Medical University decision.
26. SEATMATRIXFOR SERVICE AND NON-SERVICE CANDIDATES
Details Seats
For Service Candidates 5
For Service & Non – Service Candidates
5
based onMerit
27. ROUNDS OF ONLINECOUNSELLING BASEDONTHEVACANCIES
There are four Roundsofcounselling
I. Round 1
II. Round 2
III. Round 3
IV. Stray Round.
Online counselling for Round 2, Round 3 and Stray Round will be done only if there is
vacancy.
28. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR ONLINECOUNSELLING:
i.OnlineProcessingFee:
Allcandidates shouldpayanon-refundableamount of Rs.1,000/-(RupeesOnethousand
only) towards online processing fee for counselling at the time of submission of choice
filling.
16
ii. AdvanceTuitionFee:
At the time of choice locking, candidates must pay a refundable advance tuition fee of
Rs.5,000/-(RupeesFiveThousandonly)forGovernmentquotaseats.
Note: This amount will not be refunded if a seat is allotted from the third round of
counselling.
iii. CounsellingSchedule:
The counselling schedule will be published on the official website
www.tnayushselection.org.
Candidates must login and lock their choices for each round of counselling within the
stipulateddatesandtimeaspertheschedule.
iv. ChoiceFilling:
 Candidates are advised to exercise caution during choice filling and to select
preferredcollegesandspecialtiesaccordingtotheirindividualpreferences.
 Choicescanbeediteduntiltheyarelocked.
 Oncechoicesarelocked,theycannotbemodifiedunderanycircumstances.
v. SeatAllotment:
Admission to M.D.(Unani) Courses will be through online counselling, based on
candidate rank and as per reservation norms, considering the preferences entered by the
candidate.
vi. SecurityGuidelines:
Candidates should not share their login credentials (Login ID, Password, OTP) with
anyonetoensuredatasecurityandpreventmisuse.
vii.ProvisionalAllotment:
Provisionally selected candidates for Government seats must download the provisional
allotment order and join the college in which they are allotted within the stipulated date
andtime.
viii. EligibilityforFurtherRounds:
Candidates who have joined a seat up to Round 3 and who have been allotted seat in
Round3ofAllIndiaQuotaorStateQuotacounselling willnotbeeligibleto participate
in subsequent rounds for either quota for the academic year 2025–2026, as per the
NCISMInformationBulletin.
ix.CentralizedDataUpload:
The Medical Counselling Committee (MCC) of NCISM, MoHFW, has developed a
17
centralized software platform for all participating States/Counselling Authorities under
AACCC.Thisplatform willbeusedtoupload thenamesand rollnumbersofcandidates
who have joined up to Round 3 (and further rounds) under the State Quota or Round 3
oftheAllIndiaQuotaonacommonportal.
I.ROUND 1OFONLINE COUNSELLING
a. Candidates should pay thefollowing fees through the onlinebank payment portal:
 A non-refundable online processing fee of Rs.1000/- (Rupees OneThousand
only) at the timeofChoice filling.
 A refundable advance tuition fee of Rs. 5,000 (Rupees Five Thousand only) at
thetimeofChoicelocking.
b. Candidates are advised to be careful during choice filling and are encouraged to select
onlypreferred specialties.
c. Choices can be edited before locking. However, once the choices are locked, they
cannot be modifiedunder any circumstances.
d. Candidates who are allotted a seat in Round 1 of the online counselling should
download their Provisional allotment order and join the course in the respective
collegeonorbefore thestipulated dateand time.
II.ROUND 2OFONLINECOUNSELLING
a. Candidates who wish to retain their allotted seats and do not want a change are
notrequired toparticipate inRound 2.
b. Candidates who are allotted a seat in Round 1 and joined / not joined or
discontinued from the course within the stipulated date and time will remain
eligible toparticipate inthe round2of theonlinecounselling.
c. Re-allotment of seats will be permitted during Round 2 and Round 3 of
counselling, based on the candidate's rank and in accordance with the reservation
norms.
d. Re-choice filling is not required for candidates who have locked their choice for
Round 1butwere notallotted a seat in thesame round.
e. Fresh choice filling is permitted in Round 2 only for candidates who did not lock
their choice in Round 1 and such candidates should pay a non-refundable online
processing fee of Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) at the time of choice
filling and a refundable advance tuition fee of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand
only) at timeofchoice locking.
18
f. If a candidate is upgraded/re-allotted in Round 2, he/she will have no claim over
the seat allotted to them in Round-1, and have to join the seat allotted in Round 2.
In addition, the seat allotted in Round 1 will be made available to othercandidates
based ondescending order of provisional rank list and not ascending order.
g. Choice filling for Round 2 will follow the payment of online processing fee is not
mandatory for:
 Candidates seeking upgradation
 Not-joined candidates
 Unallotted candidates
h. A candidate who has not joined or discontinued the Course before the stipulated
time will remain eligible for subsequent rounds of the counselling for the
academicyear 2025–2026without forfeitingany fee.
i. A candidate who has joined and discontinued the course after the stipulated time
should forfeit the advance tuition fee already paid by the candidate. In addition,
he/she should pay the Discontinuation fee of Rs.10,000,00/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs
only) and then he/she is notbe eligible forRound 3.
Virtual Vacancies
 If a candidate allotted a seat in Round 1 opts for upgradation in Round 2, that
Round 1seat willbe displayed as a virtual vacancy.
 All candidates will be allowed to fill choices for virtual vacancies during Round 2
choice filling.
 However, such seats will be converted to real vacancies and allotted in Round 2
onlyif thecandidate from Round 1vacates orupgrades theseat.
III.ROUND 3OF ONLINECOUNSELLING
After completion of Round 2 of online counselling, the remaining vacancies will be filled
upwiththe candidates from theProvisional Merit listbyRound 3onlinecounselling.
FeePayment
Candidates who would like to participate in Round 3 of online counselling and not paid
the non-refundable online processing fee of ₹1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) and
advance tuition fee ₹5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) via the online bank payment
portal in theearlier rounds, shouldpay thesame, whilefillingtheir choice.
Eligibility forRound3
a. Candidates who filled their choice for Round 1 or Round 2 but were not allotted any
19
seat are eligibleand not required to lock theirchoice again.
b. Fresh choice filling is allowed for candidates who have not filled their choice in
Round 1orRound 2.
c. Candidates who have joined a seat up to Round 3 of All India Quota or State Quota
counselling will not be eligible to participate in any further rounds of counselling for
theacademic year 2025–2026,as per theNCISM Information Bulletin.
d.Candidates upgraded from Round2to Round3must:
Have noclaim overthe seat allotted to them in Round2.
Have to JointheRound 3allotted seat within thestipulated dateand time.
e. Once a candidate joined the Round 3 seat, they will not be allowed to upgrade,
withdraw, orresign from that seat under any circumstances.
f. Candidates who fail to jointhe seat allotted inRound 3will:
Forfeit boththe onlineprocessing fee and advance tuitionfee paid
Becomeineligible for any further rounds of counselling.
Hence, the Candidates are advised to exercise due diligence in their options and do not
fillunwanted options inwhich they donot wish topursue studies.
IV. STRAYROUND OF COUNSELLING
a. Stray vacancies, if any, arising after the completion of Round 3 counselling will
be filled through a Stray Round, conducted by the Selection Committee under the
direction of the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, by
following theguidelines ofNCISM.
b. Only candidates who are not holding any seat in the M.D. (Unani) Course (have
not been allotted seats in Round 1, Round 2 and Round 3) are eligible to
participate in thisround.
c. Candidates who have already joined any seat under the All India or State Quota
forM.D. (UNANI) are not eligible forthis round.
d. Candidates who want to participate a fresh in the Stray Round (or any subsequent
special rounds), they must pay a non-refundable online Registration fee of
Rs.3,000 /- (Rupees Three Thousand only) towards application, Online
Processing fee of Rs.1,000 /- (Rupees One Thousand only) and advance tuition
fee of Rs.5,000 /- (Rupees Five Thousand only) via the online bank payment
portal.
e. If a seat is allotted in the Stray Round, the candidate should download the
20
provisional allotment order and join the allotted College within the stipulated date
and time mentioned in the allotment order. If a candidate either fails to download
the allotment order, or downloaded but fails to join the allotted College within the
stipulated deadline, then the registration fee and advance tuition fee paid by the
candidates will be forfeited and the candidate will be debarred from participating
inM.D. (Unani) Counselling for thenextacademic year.
f. If a candidate joined the College through the Stray Round and then discontinued
the Course after the stipulated date and time as prescribed by NCISM/AACCC or
theState Selection Committee, the registration fee and advance tuition fee paid by
the candidates will be forfeited. In addition, he/she must pay a discontinuation fee
ofRs.10,00,000/-(Rupees Ten Lakhs only).
i.Malpractice / Misconduct / LegalViolations
a. If any candidate is found to have engaged in impersonation, suppressed or
misrepresented facts, or submitted falsified/bogus Certificates, the provisional allotment
order willbe cancelled and legal/criminal proceedings will beinitiated.
b. If, during AIAPGET (Unani) PG 2025 or at any stage of the allotment/admission
process for M.D. (Unani) 2025–2026 in Tamil Nadu, a candidate is found guilty of
impersonation (e.g., mismatched photograph/signature/documents), they will be handed
over to the police by the principal or by the Commissioner of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy, and the case will be pursued under the Indian Penal Code. Such
candidates will be permanently debarred from future M.D. (Unani) admissions in Tamil
Nadu.
ii.Disclaimer
TheSelection Committee shall notbe responsiblefor:
 Rules and regulations of theNCISM or any other authority
 Candidates are advised to review the official websites of respective Colleges and
NCISM before exercising theirchoices.
iii. SeatMatrix Notification
The seat matrix for Government Quota seats in Government Unani Medical College will
bepublished ontheofficial website priorto counselling.
29. Candidates allotted seat inSpecial Category are not eligible for General Counselling.
30. Branch and college once opted and allotted to the candidate at the time of Counselling
cannot be changed subsequently under anycircumstances.
21
31. The Post Graduate Degree Course M.D. (Unani) admissions for 2025 – 2026 session will
be closed on the cut-off date of admission as prescribed by the Ministry of AYUSH/
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine / Government of India /Tamil Nadu
Dr. M.G.R.Medical University for theacademicyear 2025–2026.
32. Candidates who have joined a Post-Graduate Degree M.D. (Unani) Course in any
discipline and have discontinued the course on any grounds after the cut-off date, are not
eligible to apply for subsequent two academic years of any discipline in Post Graduate
Degree Course M.D. (Unani). Further the candidate shall be considered as discontinued
and should pay theDiscontinuation Fee as per thisprospectus.
33. The candidates who join Post Graduate Degree Course M.D. (Unani) should not indulge
in any kind of agitation / strike / ragging activity inside / outside the College campus
during the course of study. Candidates will have to give a Discipline Declaration to this
effect at the time of admission as in Annexure – IV. Candidates found to take part in any
such activities mentioned above will be expelled from the course/college at any point
during thecourse ofstudyand criminal action willbetaken againstthem.
34. No re-allotment forSpecial Category.
If adequate number of eligible candidates are not available under Special Category,
the earmarked seats will be reverted back to general category. Any discontinued / not
joined vacancies in Special category (PwBD only) will be added to General Category in
thesubsequent phases ofcounselling.
35. SALARYFORTHESERVICECANDIDATESINLIEUOFSTIPEND:
i. Candidates who have been regularly appointed in the Tamil Nadu Medical
Service and selected under the category of Service Candidates will alone be
paid salary asperGovernment orders inforce.
ii. Service candidates will be paid salary by their respective organizations,
institutions/ Government etc.,
Iii Service Candidates from Local Bodies will not be paid any salary by the
Government during theperiod of study.
36. STIPEND TONON-SERVICE CANDIDATE
It should be noted carefully that the MD (Unani) Course is a full-time programme where
the candidate is expected to be exposed on all days to a variety of patients. For this
reason, an amount specified by the Government will be paid as stipend to the candidates.
Therefore, students shall not participate in any activity outside the College or additional
22
to the course or medical duties and no permission shall be available for the same for
whatsoeverreason.
37. All the Post Graduate MD (Unani) students shall attend the Out Patient ward session, in
case of both clinical and non-clinical Post Graduate courses and also In-Patient ward
session in the case of clinical Post Graduate Courses and the theory classes for all the
Post Graduate courses every day without fail and regularly. In case, a student attends
only Outpatient session or In-patient ward session and does not attend the Theory classes
or vice versa, such Post Graduate student shall not be eligible for any stipend for the day
since the M.D. (Unani) is a whole-time course. Every student shall fulfil the minimum
requirement of attendance as may be prescribed by the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University, Chennai from time to time for becoming eligible to take up the examination
of the said University. If a Post Graduate student is not permitted to take up the said
University’s examinations as per the regulations in force and amended from time to time
and consequently if the period of study is extended, no stipend shall be paid to such
student for such period of extension of study. The Post Graduate students shall be subject
to the rules, regulations, conventions and practice being followed in the hospital and the
concerned medical college and code of conduct, rules etc., as laid down by the
Government, the Tamil Nadu Dr.M.G.R. Medical University and the National
Commissionfor Indian System ofMedicine, New Delhi from timeto time.
38. In case of breach of any such rules, regulations etc., as stated above, the principal of the
respective Government Unani Medical College shall take appropriate disciplinary action
against such student including the disqualification of the student to continue further Post
Graduate studies and communicate the same to the Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical
University.
39. IMPORTANT CONDITIONS
i. Service candidates willnot be eligiblefor studyleave.
ii. The entire period spent by service candidates for undergoing M.D.(Unani) course
with salary will be treated as on duty for all purpose viz. probation, increment,
pension, etc., except for thepurpose ofPay andLeave.
iii. In case, where the stipend period is to be counted towards probation period,
orders of the Government have to be obtained for the relaxation of the relevant
rules.
iv. No paid post will be given to candidates who are selected for M.D.(Unani)Course
23
and they shall work full time in the Department of their respective specialties.
They should not indulge inprivate practice duringthe period of study.
40 i) All Candidates (Service and Non-Service) undergoing the M.D.(Unani) Course
should execute a Bond as per Annexure VI to the effect that in the event of
discontinuing their studies before completion of the course, they shall be liable for refund
of the full amount of stipend received by them till the day of discontinuation along with
three sureties in permanent Government Service of equal rank or above at the time of
admissiontothecourse.
(ii) Further, the Candidates who discontinue the Course on or after the last date of
allotment of seats / cut-off date for admission processes pertaining to the Academic
Session 2025 – 2026 as fixed by Ministry of AYUSH / Affiliating University, shall
pay the Discontinuation Fees of a sum of Rs. 10,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) by
means of Demand Draft drawn in favour of “The Director of Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy, Chennai -106” payable at Chennai. Unless the penalty amount is paid
in total, the Candidates will not be relieved and original certificates / documents will be
retained by the College authorities. All candidates shall execute a bond to this effect at
thetimeofadmission totheCollege.
(iii)Forfeitureof Tuitionand OtherFees:
Candidates pursuing M.D.(Unani) Course in the event of discontinuing their studies
on or after the cut-off date for admission processes relevant to the particular
admission session may also have to forego the Tuition fees and other kinds of fees
remitted to the College authority during the period of study. This applies even if the
discontinuation is due to personal, medical, or professional reasons. The candidates
who discontinue their study before the completion of M.D.(Unani) Course are liable
to fulfill the above conditions. Hence, Candidates are advised to thoroughly
understand the bond conditions and evaluate their commitment before accepting
admission,as theabove rules will bestrictly enforced.
41.  Service Candidates selected to the course should execute a bond in the
prescribed form available at the College at the time of admission, for
Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs Only) along with three sureties in permanent
Government Service of equal rank or higher rank than the candidate for an
equivalent amount at the time of admission, in pursuance of their undertaking to
theeffect that they shall serve the concerned Government orlocal body, etc. for
24
aminimumperiod offiveyears after the completion ofthecourse.
 If the service candidate serves for a period less than five years, the proportion of
the salary and stipend or other payments made to the candidate during the course
period in relation to the ratio of period in whole months served over the
requirement of sixty months shall be treated as the candidate entitlement and the
remaining amount which relates to the short fall and period of commitment shall
be recovered from the service candidate or paid by candidate prior to
candidate’s discharge from service.
42. Candidates undergoing the M.D. (Unani) Course who have secured appointment in Tamil
Nadu Medical Service through the Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission / Medical
Services Recruitment Board shall not be permitted to discontinue the course without
satisfying the condition of their bond. They shall also not be permitted to re-join the MD
(Unani) programme midway at a later point of time or retain rights to join the M.D.
(Unani) programme without completing the waiting period and without appearing in the
AIAPGET (Unani) pertaining to the relevant academic year except in accordance with
orders of Government through Health Department regulating readmission in respect of
suchdiscontinuance.
43. All Government Orders issued and to be issued from time to time, relating to any of the
matters mentioned in this Prospectus, shall be deemed to form an integral part of this
Prospectus. The terms and conditions laid down in such Government Orders will be
automatically incorporated and willhave binding effect onall candidates.
44. No admission, re-allotment / transfer shall be made after cut-off date for the academic
year as per the guidelines issued by the MoA (Ministry of AYUSH) and The Tamil Nadu
Dr.M.G.R. Medical University.
45. COVID-19 INSTRUCTION
The candidates and their parents attending Special Category Counselling are instructed
to follow the standard preventivemeasures to reduce the risk of COVID-19 during the
counselling as per theGovernment order from timeto time.
For CommissionerofIndian Medicine
and Homoeopathy.
25
CHECK LIST FOR M.D.(UNANI) ADMISSION 2025-2026 SESSION
CATEGORY- I CANDIDATES WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU AND
: STUDIED BUMSCOURSEINTAMILNADU
CATEGORY-II: CANDIDATES WHO ARE NATIVE OF TAMIL NADU BUT
STUDIED BUMS COURSE PARTLY/ FULLY IN OUTSIDE
TAMILNADU
CATEGORY-III: CANDIDATESWHOARENON-NATIVEOFTAMILNADUAND
STUDIEDBUMS COURSECONTINUOUSLYINTAMILNADU
CERTIFICATES/DOCUMENTS CATEGORY ICATEGORYII CATEGORYIII
DOCUMENTS OF CANDIDATE’S ARE AS FOLLOWS:
X-Mark Sheet/Birth Certificate   
BUMSFinalYearMarkSheet/Sheets   
Transfer Certificate   
Nativity Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil Nadu  
Community Certificate from Competent Authority of Tamil
 
Nadu(except-OC)
Special Category Certificates for Persons with Bench mark
Disabilities, (ifapplicable)   
Candidate’s Aadhar card   
DOCUMENTS OF PARENTS ARE AS FOLLOWS:
Parent Community Certificate from Competent Authority of
 
TamilNadu(except-OC)
26
ROUND FREE RESIGNATION EXIT WITH Eligibility FOR DISCONTINUATION FEES
EXIT FORFEITURE FURTHER AFTERJOINING
OFFEE COUNSELLING
Round1 Allowed Allowed Allowed to Eligible for NIL,beforeRound2
exit further
counselling
Round2 Allowed Allowed only Allowed to Eligible for If thecandidatesresignbeforethe
exit within further stipulated date in Round 2 the
once within
stipulated counselling candidates will be allowed free
stipulatedtime
time without exit.
forfeiture
After the stipulated date in round
2, discontinuation fees will be
Rs.10,00,000 lakhs and forfeit
Advancetuitionfees.
Round3 Not Notallowed If not joined, Not allowed in After joining the allotted seat of
allowed forfeit Advance nextround round3,discontinuation feeswill
tuitionfee be Rs.10,00,000 lakhs and
forfeiture of Advance tuition
feeswillalsoapply.
Round 4 Not Notallowed If not joined Not eligible for After joining the allotted seat of
(Stray allowed forfeit nextoneyear. Stray round, discontinuation fees
round) Advance will be Rs.10,00,000 lakhs and
tuition fees & forfeiture of Advance tuition
Tuitionfee fees&Tuitionfeewillalsoapply.
27
ROUND CANDIDATE FORFEITUREOFFEES ELIGIBILITY
If allotted Can participate in round 2 for
Noforfeitureoffees
andjoined re- allotment
If allotted and
Can participate in subsequent rounds
not joined / Noforfeitureoffees
Round1 ofcounseling
Resigned
If not allotted / If Can participate in subsequent rounds
not choice ofcounseling
locked
No forfeiture of fees. Allowed to Allowed for further rounds of
If allotted vacate seat once before the counseling
andjoined stipulated date.
If allotted / Noforfeitureoffees Allowed for further rounds of
Re-allotted counseling
and not joined
Round2
If not choice
Noforfeitureoffees Eligibleforround3
locked
If wants to Forfeiture of advance tuition fee and Not eligibleforround3
discontinue after pay discontinuation fee
the stipulated
dateand time
If notallotted Eligibleforround3
If allotted Notallowedtovacateseat. Not allowed for further rounds of
andJoined If wants to discontinue, then counseling
forfeit Advance tuition fees and pay
Discontinuation fee
Round3 If allotted and
ForfeitAdvance tuitionfees Noteligibleforstrayround
Not joined
If notallotted Eligibleforstrayvacancy
If not choice
Eligibleforstrayvacancy
locked
Notallowedtovacateseat.
If allotted If wants to discontinue, then
Noteligiblefornextoneyear.
Stray andJoined forfeit Advance tuition fees and pay
vacancy Discontinuation fee
If allotted and
ForfeitAdvance tuitionfees Noteligiblefornextoneyear.
Not joined
28
ANNEXURE - I
CERTIFICATEOF NATIVITYIN TAMILNADU
Certified that Dr. ………………………………………………………………………………S/o.
D/o. W/o. Thiru……………………………………………………………………………..an applicant
for admission to Post Graduate studies who normally resides
at………………………………………………………………………………………… in Tamil Nadu is
aNativeof TamilNadu.
Taluk…………………………………………
District……………………………………….
State………………………………………….
Signature oftheTahsildar.
Office Seal:
Signature:
Nameand Designation:
Station:
Date:
INSTRUCTIONSFORNATIVITY CERTIFICATE
1. This Certificate should be issued by an officer of the Revenue Department not below the rank
ofTahsildar intheTaluk concerned.
2. This Certificate should not be issued by the Special Tahsildars, Deputy Tahsildars such as
Loans, Land Acquisition, Election, Excise and HQs, Deputy Tahsildars, Special Deputy
Collectors, Assistant Commissionerof Agricultural Income, Excise, andElections etc.
3. ThisCertificate should besigned also bythe Village AdministrativeOfficer.
4. TheCertificate shouldbear the stamp oftheoffice of theOfficer signing theCertificate.
5. Any foreign national irrespective of the period of study in the State will not become eligible to
apply for this course. No certificate of Nativity in the State of Tamil Nadu, should therefore be
issued toNationals of othercountries forthis purpose.
6. The certifying officers should insist upon clear proof of the Nativity of the Parent or Guardian
ofthe candidate and satisfy themselves onthegenuineness oftheresidential qualification.
7. PermanentResidence Certificatewill notbeconsidered as Nativity Certificate.
8. The guidelines prescribed for the issue of Nativity Certificate and they are as follows as per
29
Letter No. RA.V(B)16932/2000, dated 3-4-2000 of the Special Commissioner and
CommissionerofRevenue Administration,Chepauk, Chennai-5.
(i) The parents/guardians of the applicants/students or the applicants themselves shouldhave
permanently resided continuously for aperiod offiveyears in Tamil Nadu.
(ii) Permanently residing for a period of five years should be supported by Documentary
evidence.
(iii) The family ration card, Electoral Roll, Census List if taken recently, documents like sale
deed, tax receipt etc. relating to the property owned by either of the parents or by the
applicant may be verified.
(iv) The Transfer Certificate issued by the School authorities where the applicant had studied
last maybeverified to knowwhether he was inthestatefor fiveyears.
(v) Enquiry in the village / place of residence of the neighbour / Village Administrative
Officers regarding continuous residing.
(vi) Toensure that wrong orincorrect address had not been furnished toobtain the certificate.
(vii)The birth place, the present place of residence of the parent / father, Permanent assets,
mother tongue, place of education, place of marriage of the applicant / parents, the period
ofstay in andoutsideTamil Nadu can alsobe considered before issuing certificate.
30
ANNEXURE II
SERVICEPROFORMA
The service particulars of Dr. ..............................................................................................S/o. D/o. W/o.
Thiru............................................................................who is an applicant for admission to M.D. UNANI Course
2025-2025sessionareherebyfurnished.
1. DesignationofthePresentPost:
2. ServiceStatus(TickAppropriateBox)
Probationer Approved Panchayat GOIservice Undertakings/Organisation
Probationer Unionservice ofGOI/GOTN
3. DateofFirstAppointmentasTNPSCSelected:
4. DurationofServiceason31.07.2025 :
5. Detailsofpostsheldandplaceofservice :
Duration
Postheld NatureofService Place
From To
(Ifspaceisnotsufficient,separatesheetindicatingtheaboveparticularsshouldbeenclosedwith
thesignatureandofficesealofthecompetentforwardingauthority)
6. Ifthecandidateisunderanysubsisting
ContractualobligationtotheGovt.forany :
reason/detailsPLEASEPROVIDETHESAME.
7. ArethereanyCriminalProceedings,Inquiry
orDisciplinaryProceedingspendingor :
Contemplatedagainstthecandidate. Ifso,
Registrationshouldnotbeforwarded.
8. Whetherthecandidatehasproducedanundertaking:
AsmentionedinProspectusClause46.
9. WhethertheCandidatehasworkedinahilly
area? Ifso,thedetailsaboutdurationofservice
andwiththeplaceofpostingetc.maybefurnished.
Theleaveifany,exceptCasualLeave,shallbe
Excluded.
Station: Signature:
Date: OfficeSeal:
Note: All applicants should obtain Service Certificate from the Competent Authority Registrations without
ServiceParticularsdulyauthenticatedbythecompetentauthorityareliableforrejection.
31
ANNEXURE-III
CERTIFICATEOFDISABILITY
AsperIndianMedicineCentralCouncil(Post–GraduateUnaniEducation)
AmendmentRegulation,2019
ForadmissiontoM.D.UnaniCourses
CertificateNo………………….. Date……………… Recent
NameoftheDesignatedDisabilityCentre(asperannexure): Passport Size
This is to certify that Dr./Mr./Ms. Photograph of
/ ........………………….……………………….aged………………….Years, Son / Daughter the candidate
ofThiru……………………………………….residing duly attested
at……………………………………………………………………………….. by the issuing
……………………………………………………………………………………………
authority.
AIAPGET-2025No…………………………RankNo.………………………,hasthe
Following Disability (Name of the Specified Disability) ……………………………………………………. (in
percentage)of............................(inwords)……………………….(infigure).
 Pleasetickonthe“SpecifiedDisability”
(Assessment may be done on the basis of Gazette of India. Extraordinary, Part-III, Section 4) similar to MCI
notification.
Sl.No. Disability Type of SpecifiedDisability DisabilityRange
Category Disabilities
(5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) Eligible for Eligible for M.D.(UNANI) Not Eligible for
M.D.(UNANI) Programme, Eligible for Programme
Programme, Not PwDQuota
EligibleforPwDQuota
1. PhysicalDisability (A) Locomotor (a)Leprosy Less than 40% 40-80%disability More than80%
Disability, including cured disability Persons with more than
Specified Disabilities person* 80%disabilitymayalsobe
(atof). allowed on case to case
(b)Cerebral
basisandtheirfunctionain
Palsy**
competency will the aid of
(c)Dwarfism assistive devices, if it is
being used, to see if it is
(d)Muscular brought below 80% and
Dystrophy whether they possess
sufficient motor ability as
(e)Acidattackvictims
required to pursue and
(f)Other* complete the program me
**suchasAmputation, satisfactorily.
Poliomyelitis,etc.
* Attention should be paid to loss of sensations in fingers and hands, amputation, as well as
involvementofeyesandcorrespondingrecommendationsbelookedat.
**Attentionshouldbepaidtoimpairmentofvision,hearing,Cognitivefunctionetc.andcorresponding
recommendationsBelookedat.
***Bothhandsintact,withintactsensations,sufficientstrengthAndrangeofmotionareessentialtobe
consideredeligibleforM.D.(UNANI)programme.
(B) Visual (a)Blindness Less than 40% Equal to or more
Impairment(*) disability(i.e. than40%
Category‘0 Disability(i.e.
(10%)’I(20%)’ Category III and
&II(30%) above)
(b)Lowvision
32
(C) Hearing (a)Deaf Less than 40% Equal to or more
Impairment@ Disability than40%
(b)Hardofhearing Disability
(*) Persons with Visualimpairment/ visual disabilityof more than40% may bemade eligible to
pursueGraduate M.D.(UNANI) Education andmaybegiven reservation,subjecttothe condition
thatthevisualdisabilityisbroughttoaleveloflessthanthebenchmarkof40%withadvancedlow
visionaidssuchastelescopes/magnifieretc.
@ Persons with hearing disability of more than 40% may be made eligible to pursue Graduate
M.D.(UNANI) Education and may be given reservation, subject to the condition that the hearing
disabilityisbroughttoaleveloflessthanthebenchmarkof40%withtheaidofassistivedevices.
Inadditiontothis,theindividualshouldhaveaspeechdiscriminationscoreofmorethan60%.
(D)Speech& Organic/ Lessthan40% Equaltoor
languagedisability Neurologicalcauses Disability more than
40%
Disability
ItisproposedthatforadmissiontoM.D.(UNANI)programmetheSpeechIntelligibilityAffected(SIA)scoreshallnotexceed3
(Whichwillcorrespondtolessthan40%)tobeeligibletopursuetheM.D.(UNANI)programme.Theindividualsbeyondthis
scorewillnotbeeligibleforadmissiontotheM.D.(UNANI)programme.
PersonswithanAphasiaQuotient(AQ)upto40%maybeeligibletopursueM.D.(UNANI)programmebutbeyondthatthey
willneitherbeeligibletopursuetheM.D.(UNANI)programmenorwilltheyhaveanyreservation.
2. Intellectual (a)Specific #CurrentlythereisnoQuantificationscaleavailabletoassesstheseverityof
disability Learning disabilities SpLD,thereforethecut-offof40%isarbitraryandmoreevidenceisneeded.
(Perceptual
disabilities, Dyslexia, Lessthan40% Equal to or more than 40%
Dyscalculia,Dyspraxia Disability disability but selection will
&Developmental be based on the learning
aphasia)# competency evaluated with
thehelp ofthere mediation/
assisted technology / aids /
infrastructuralchangesbythe
ExpertPanel.
(b)Autism Absence or Mild Currentlynotrecommended Equal to or
Spectrumdisorders Disability, due to lack of objective morethan60%
Asperger’s syndrome method to establish disability or
(disabilityof40-60% presence and extent of presence of
as Per ISAA) where mentalillness. cognitive/intellectua
the individual is However, the benefit of ldisabilityandorif
deemed fit for M.D. reservation/quota may be the person is
(UNANI) considered in future after deemed unfit for
programme by an developing better methods pursuing
expertpanel ofdisabilityassessment. M.D.(UNANI)
programme by an
expertpanel.
3. MentalBehaviour Mentalillness Absence or mild Currentlynotrecommended Equal to or more
Disability: less than due to lack of objective than40%
40%(underIDEAS) method to establish Disability or if the
presence and extent of person is deemed
mentalillness. unfit to perform
However, the benefit of hi/her duties.
reservation/quota may be Standards may be
considered in future after drafted for the
developing better methods definite of “fitness
ofdisabilityassessment. to practice
medicine” as are
used by several
institutions of
countries other than
India.
4. Disability caused (a) Chronic (i)MultipleSclerosis Less than 40% 40%80% Morethan80%
dueto NeurologicalConditions Disability disability
(ii)Parkinsonism
33
(b)Blood (i)Haemophilia Less than 40% 40%to80% Morethan80%
Disorders Disability disability
(ii)Thalassemia
(iii)Sicklecelldisease
5. Multiple disabilities More than one of the Must consider all above while deciding in individual cases
including deaf, above specified recommendations with respect to presence any of the above, namely,
blindness disabilities visual,Hearing,Speech&Languagedisability,IntellectualDisability,and
MentalIllnessasacomponentofMultipleDisability.
Combining formula asnotified by therelated Gazette Notificationissued
bytheGovt.ofIndia
a+b(90-a)
90
(Wherea=highervalueofdisability%andb=lowervalueofdisability%as
calculatedfordifferentdisabilities)
Is recommended for computing the disability arising when more than one
disabling condition is present in a given individual. This formula may be
used in cases with multiple disabilities, and recommendations regarding
admissionand/orreservationmadeasperthespecificdisabilitiespresentina
givenindividual
Note: For selection under PwD category, candidates will be required to produce Disability Certificate before their schedule date of
counsellingfromoneofthedisabilityassessmentboardsasdesignatedbyconcernedAuthorityofGovernmentofIndia.
Conclusion: He/She is Eligible/Not Eligible for admission in Indian Medicine courses as
pertheCCIMGazetteNotificationsubjecttohisbeingotherwisemedicallyfit.
 Functional competency with the aid of Assistive devices in case of
Locomotor*/Visual*/Hearing*Impairment,ifany
Sign.&Name Sign.&Name Sign.&Name
(ConcernedSpecialist) (ConcernedSpecialist) (ConcernedSpecialist)
Note:
1. The selected candidates have to undergo a second medical examination by a medical board constituted for the
purpose by the Director of Medical Education to ascertain and confirm the nature and extent of physically
disability.
2. ThedecisionoftheDirectorofIndianMedicineandHomoeopathyinthisregardwillbefinal.
34
ANNEXURE - IV
DISCIPLINEDECLARATIONBYTHECANDIDATE
I________________________ undersigned, a student selected for admission
to___________________________________ course in Government Unani Medical College, Chennai do
herebyagreetoconfirm from this date, Iwillfollow the rules and regulations including those relating
to the Hostel laid down or to be laid down hereafter by the Principal ofthecollegeforthetimebeingfor
theduemaintenanceofdisciplineatthesaidcollegeandIassuredthatIwillnotjoinanyagitation/strikeof
any kind during the course of study. I further agree to make good when called upon to do so to the
Government of Tamil Nadu any damage to furniture, apparatus or other articles which may be caused by
anycarelessness,negligencewantonlyonmypart.
Iwillnotindulgeorparticipateinanykindofraggingandiffoundtohaveindulged in ragging in the past
or noticed later, I am aware that I will be removed fromthe roll of the institution at whatever stage of
studyandcriminalactionwillbetakenagainstme.
SignatureofCandidate’sParent/Guardian SignatureoftheApplicant
35
Annexure–V
Declarationforunauthorised absenceby theCandidate
I, Dr.____________________________________________________ S/o, D/o, W/o
________________________________ do here by solemnly declare that after I join the course if I
abstain unauthorisedly from attending classes for one month or more, I agree that, I may be
considered as discontinued without notice on automatic basis and the vacancy that may arise may be
filled up from the waiting list depending upon the availability of time before the prescribed cut-off
datebytheSelection committeefor P.G. Courses.
Signature oftheCandidate.
36
ANNEXURE VI
AGREEMENT BONDFOR CANDIDATES ADMITTEDTO
M.D.UNANI COURSE 2025–2026SESSIONIN
GOVT. UNANI MEDICAL COLLEGES, CHENNAI
THIS DEED OF BOND IS EXECUTED AT________________________ON THIS DAY OF
_______________BY
Name:___________________________
S/O,D/O, W/O_____________________
ResidingAt (Permanent Address):________________________
(Temporary Address):_________________________
LandLine PhoneNo:____________
MobileNo:______________________
email id:__________________________
AADHARNO.____________________
TO
IN FAVOUR OFGOVERNMENT UNANI MEDICAL COLLEGE, CHENNAI
WHEREAS the Party of the FIRST PART have applied for admission to M.D.UNANI course
and theParty of theFIRST PART has been selected tothe said course.
As per the Prospectus, the Party of the FIRST PART has agreed to serve the
Government of Tamil Nadu till superannuation (For Service Candidates) / for a period not less
than__________ years (For Non Service Candidates) after successful completion of the
M.D.UNANI course and on such failure of not completing the full bond period of years, the
Party of the FIRST PART shall forthwith pay a sum of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs
only).
During the above period, the Party of the FIRST PART (For Non Service Candidates)
shall be paid Stipend and the Government of Tamil Nadu will request their services within a
period of 2years from thedateof completion oftheM.D.UNANI course.
AND WHEREAS for the better protection of the Government, the Party of the FIRST
PART has agreed to execute the bond with 3 sureties who are Income Tax assesses to stand
guaranteefor theabove said amount ofRs.10,00,000/-(Rupees Ten Lakhs only).
AND WHEREAS the Party of the FIRST PART have also agreed that on successful
completion of the M.D.UNANI course, his/ her certificates relating to M.D.UNANI course
will not be given to the Party of the FIRSTPART unless the Party of the FIRST PART
successfully completes the bond period of______________ years or pay to the Governor of
Tamil Nadu his successors and assignees (here in after called “ The Government”) on demand
the sum of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) and on such default together with interest
at Government rates thereon from thedate ofdemand onthesaid amount.
The Party of the FIRST PART__________________________ or his/ her legalheirs,
executors and administrators shall forth with pay to the Government on demand the said sum
of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) and on such default together with interest from the
demand at Government rates there on from the date of demand on the said demand on the said
amount Loan.
AND WHEREAS the Government have , at the request of the Party of the FIRST
PART employed as granted stipend to him / her for a period of 36 months with effect from
___________inorder toenable him/ herto studyat ___________________________College.
AND WHEREAS if the Party of the FIRST PART____________________________
works for a period of less than 36 months during the M.D.UNANI course /
_________________, the proportionate amount will be treated as stipend and the Party of the
37
FIRST PART________________________shall pay back in addition to the security amount of
Rs.__________________/ -(Rupees_______________ Lakh only) with the balance amount of
stipend tothe Government.
AND WHEREAS if the Party of the FIRST PART__________________discontinues
the course at any time before the completion of the M.D.UNANI course the Party of the
FIRST PART shall pay back in total, amount received as stipend in addition to the
discontinuationfee Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only).
ANDuponthe Party oftheFIRST PART_____________________or
1._____________________________or2.________________________or
3.______________________
The sureties a fore said making such payment, the above written bond shall be void and be of
noeffect, otherwise it shallremain in force and virtue
PROVIDED always that the liability of the sureties hereunder shall not be impaired or
discharged by reasonable time being granted or by any forbearance, act or omission of the
Government or any person authorized by them (Whether with or without the consent
knowledge of the sureties) nor shall it be necessary for the Government to sue the Party of the
FIRST PARTbefore suing thesureties
1.__________________________________________________
2___________________________________________and
3._________________________________
Orany ofthem for amount duehereunder.
This bond shall in all respects be Governed by the Laws of India, for the time being in
force, and the rights and liabilities shall, where necessary, be accordingly determined by the
appropriatecourts inIndia.
This bond is exempted from stamp duty, under Article 57 of Schedule- I of the Indian
StampAct, 1899.(Central Act II of 1899)
NOW THEDEED OFINDEMNITY BONDWITNESSESS AS FOLLOWS:
1. The Party of the FIRST PART has agreed to serve the Government of Tamil Nadu Medical
Services for a period of on successful completion of the M.D.UNANI course
at___________________________________ and in the event of default the Party of the
FIRST PART shall pay forthwith a sum of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only).to the
Government ofTamil NaduMedical Services.
2. For the aforesaid amount Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only). the Party of the FIRST
PART has brought 3 sureties and it should stand alive till successful completion of the
________years bond period with the Government by the Party of the FIRST PART. Or in the
event of suchdefault till payment ofRs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only). ispaid tothe
Government ofTamil NaduMedical Services.
3. The Party of the FIRST PART agrees that till the successful completion of the period of
years service to the Government of Tamil Nadu or till the payment of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees
Ten Lakhs only) is paid the certificates relating to M.D.UNANI course
at________________________________ shall be in the custody of the Party of the Second
Part College and the Government has a first lien over all the certificates gained by the
candidate at thetimeofadmission.
38
The Party of FIRST PART authorizes for retention of the certificates till the lien is cleared /
discharged.
Signed and Dated at _____________onthisthe ____________day of_____________.
Signed and delivered bytheParty oftheFIRST PART _______________.
Signature oftheCandidate:
PANNo. ofSurety 1:
Aadhar No.
Signed and delivered bytheSurety _______________________________
Signature oftheSurety withseal.
In thepresence of:
Witness 1. Witness 2
Name: Name:
Address: Address:
Signature Signature
PANNo. ofSurety 2:
Aadhar No.
Signed and delivered bytheSurety _______________________________
Signature oftheSurety withseal.
In thepresence of:
Witness 1. Witness 2
Name: Name:
Address: Address:
Signature Signature
PANNo. ofSurety 3:
Aadhar No.
Signed and delivered bytheSurety _______________________________
Signature oftheSurety withseal.
In thepresence of:
Witness 1. Witness 2
Name: Name:
Address: Address:
Signature Signature
ACCEPTED
For andonbehalf ofany oftheorder and direction oftheGovernment ofTamil Nadu.
Date :
Station:
Principal
Govt. Unani Medical College, Chennai.
39
LIST OF ANNEXURES
ANNEXURES Name
Annexure-I CertificateofNativityofTamilNadu
Annexure-II ServiceProforma
Annexure-III CertificateOfDisability
Annexure–IV DisciplineDeclarationbytheCandidate
Annexure-V DeclarationforunauthorisedabsencebytheCandidate
Annexure-VI AgreementBond
For Commissionerof Indian Medicine
and Homoeopathy.
40
LIST OF COMMUNITIES
2025-2026
LIST SHOWING THE SCHEDULED CASTES,
SCHEDULED TRIBES, BACKWARD
CLASSES, BACKWARD CLASS-MUSLIMS,
MOST BACKWARD CLASSES
AND
DENOTIFIED
COMMUNITIES IN THE
STATE OF TAMILNADU
LIST OF COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE
OF TAMILNADU LISTOF BACKWARD CLASSES,
MOST BACKWARD CLASSES, DENOTIFIED
COMMUNITIES THROUGH OUT THE STATE OF TAMIL
NADU UNLESS AND OTHERWISE SPECIFIED
G.O.Ms.No.85 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes
and Minorities welfare Department dated 29.7.2008
1.
G.O.Ms.No.96, Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes
and Minorities welfare Department dated 8.9.2008
2.
G.O.Ms.No.97 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes
and Minorities welfare Department dated 11.9.2008
3.
G.O.Ms.No.37 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes
and Minorities welfare Department dated 21.5.2009
4.
41
G.O.Ms.No.98 Backward Classes, Most Backward Classes
and Minorities welfare Department dated 5.1.2009.
5.
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASSES
Sl.No Name of the Caste
1. Agamudayar including Thozhu or Thuluva Vellala
2. AgaramVellan Chettiar
3. Alwar, Azhavar and Alavar(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tirunelveli District.)
4. Servai (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Pudukottai Districts.)
5. Nulayar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
6. Archakarai Vellala
7. Aryavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tirunelveli
District)
8. Ayira Vaisyar
9. Badagar
10. Billava
11. Bondil
12. Boyas (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The
Nilgiris, Salem, Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts).
PeddaBoyar (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts) Oddars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli,Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai,Theni and
Dindigul Districts)
Kaloddars (except Kancheepuram, Chegalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukkottai, Tiruchirappalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and
Namakkal Districts)
Nellorepet oddars (except Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts) Sooramari oddars (except Salem and Namakkal Districts)
42
13 Chakkala (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Mayiladurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts)
14. Chavalakarar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
15. Chettuor Chetty (including Kottar Chetty, ElurChetty, Pathira Chetty, Valayal Chetty,
Pudukadai Chetty)(in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
16. Chowdry
16(A) Converts to Christianity from Scheduled Castes irrespective of the generation of
conversion (except the Paravar conversion to Christianity of Kanniyakumari District
and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District) for the purpose of reservation of seats in
Educational Institutions and for seats in Public Services.
16(B). C.S.I formerly S.I.U.C (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tenkasi District)
17. Donga Dasaris (except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts.
18. Devangar,Sedar
19. Dombs (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur and Ariyalur
Districts)
Dommars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Thiruvannamalai Districts)
20. Enadi
21. Ezhavathy (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
22. Ezhuthachar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
23. Ezhuva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
24. Gangavar
25. Gavara, Gavarai and Vadugar (Vaduvar) (other than Kamma, Kapu, Balija and Reddi)
26. Gounder
27. Gowda (including Gammala, Kalali and Anuppa Gounder)
28. Hegde
43
29. Idiga
30. Illathu Pillaimar, Illuvar, Ezhuvar and Illathar
31. Jhetty
32. Jogis (Except Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul, Cuddalore, Villupuram, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
Tiruvannamalai Districts)
33. Kabbera
34 Kaikolar, Sengunthar
35. Kaladi(exceptSivaganga,Virudhunagar,Ramanathapuram,Madurai,Theni,
Dindigul,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
36. Kalari Kurup including Kalari Panicker (in Kanniyakumari District and
Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
37. Kalingi
38. Kallar, Easanattu Kallar , Gandharva Kottai Kallars (except Thanjavur,
Nagapattinam, Tiruvarur, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai Districts).
Kootappal Kallars (except Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and
Ariyalur Districts)
Piramalai Kallars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai,
Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and
Tiruvarur Districts) Periyasooriyur Kallars (except Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
39. Kallar Kula Thondaman
40. Kalveli Gounder
41. Kambar
42. Kammalar or Viswakarma, Viswakarmala (including Thattar, Porkollar, Kannar,
Karumar, Kollar, Thacher, Kal Thacher, Kamsala and Viswa brahmin.)
43. Kani, Kanisu, Kaniyar Panicker
44. Kaniyala Vellalar
45. Kannada Saineegar, Kannadiyar (Throughout the State) and Dasapalanjika
(Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur and the Nilgiris Districts)
44
46. Kannadiya Naidu
47. Karpoora Chettiar
48. Karuneegar (Seer Karuneegar, Sri Karuneegar, Sarattu Karuneegar, Kaikatti
Karuneegar, Mathuvazhi Kanakkar, Sozhi Kanakkar and Sunnambu Karuneegar)
49. Kasukkara Chettiar
50. Katesar, Pattamkatti
51. Kavuthiyar
52. Kerala Mudali
53. Kharvi
54. Khatri
55. Kongu Vaishnava
56. Kongu Vellalars( including Vellala Gounder, Nattu Gounder, Narambukkatti
Gounder, Tirumudi Vellalar, Thondu Vellalar, Pala Gounder, Poosari Gounder,
Anuppa Vellala Gounder, Padaithalai Gounder, Chendalai Gounder, Pavalankatti
Vellala Gounder, Palavellala Gounder, Sanku Vellala Gounder and Rathinagiri
Gounder).
57. Koppala Velama
58. Koteyar
59. Krishnavaka (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
60. Kudikara Vellalar
61. Kudumbi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
62. Kuga Vellalar
63. Kunchidigar
63(A) Latin Catholics except Latin Catholic Vannar in Kanniyakumari District.
63(B) Lathin Catholics in Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
64. Lambadi
65. Lingayat (Jangama)
66. Mahratta (Non-Brahmin)(including Namdev Mahratta)
67. Malayar
68. Male
69. Maniagar
45
70. Maravars (except Thanjavur, Nagapattinum , Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Pudukottai, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli and
Toothukudi Districts) Karumaravars, Appanad Kondayam kottai Maravar (except
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul
Districts.)
Sembanad Maravars (except Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, and Ramanathapuram
Districts)
71. Moondrumandai Enbathunalu (84) Ur.Sozhia Vellalar
72. Mooppan
73. Muthuraja, Muthiriyar, Muttiriyar, Mutharaiyar
74. Nadar, Shanar and Gramani including Christian Nadar, Christian Shanar and
Christian Gramani.
75. Nagaram
76. Naikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
77. Nangudi Vellalar
78. Nanjil Mudali (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
79. Odar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
80. Odiya
81. Oottruvalanattu Vellalar
82. O.P.S.Vellalar
83. Ovachar
84. Paiyur Kotta Vellalar
85. Pamulu
86. Panar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
86A Pandiya Vellalar
87 -Omitted-
88. Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District
89. Pannirandam Chettiar or Uthama Chettiar
90. Parkavakulam (including Surithimar, Nathamar, Malayamar, Moopanar and Nainar)
46
91. Perike(including PerikeBalija)
92. Perumkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
93. Podikara Vellalar
94. Pooluva Gounder
95. Poraya
96. Pulavar (in Coimbatore and Tiruppur Districts)
97. Pulluvar or Pooluvar
98. Pusala
99. Reddy (Ganjam)
100. Sadhu Chetty (including Telugu Chetty, Twenty four Manai Telungu Chetty)
101. Sakkaravar or Kavathi (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District )
102. Salivagana
103. Saliyar, Padmasaliyar, Pattusaliyar, Pattariyar and Adhaviyar
104. Savalakkarar
105. Senaithalaivar, Senaikudiyar and Illaivaniar
105A Serakula Vellalar
106. Sourashtra (Patnulkarar)
107. Sozhiavellalar (including Sozha Vellalar, Vetrilaikarar, Kodikalkarar and Keeraikarar)
108. Srisayar
109. Sundaram Chetty
109A Thiyya
110. Thogatta Veerakshatriya
111. Tholkollar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
112. Tholuva Naicker and Vetalakara Naicker
113 -Omitted-
114. Thoriyar
115. Ukkirakula Kshatriya Naicker
116. Uppara, Uppillia and Sagara
117. Urali Gounder ( except Tiruchirapalli, Karur , Perambalur, Ariyalur and
47
Pudukottai District) and Orudaya Gounder or Oorudaya Gounder (in
Madurai ,Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur ,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Salem and Namakkal Districts )
118. Urikkara Nayakkar
118A Virakodi Vellala
119 Vallambar
119.A Vallanattu Chettiar
120. Valmiki
121. Vaniyar, Vania Chettiar (including Gandla, Ganika, Telikula and Chekkalar)
122. Veduvar and Vedar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of
Tenkasi District where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
123. Veerasaiva (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District)
124. Velar
125. Vellan Chettiar
126. Veluthodathu Nair (in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District)
Vokkaligar (including Vakkaligar, Okkaligar, Kappiliyar, Kappiliya, Okkaliga
127.
Gowda, Okkaliya- Gowder, Okkaliya Gowda )
128. Wynad Chetty (The Nilgiris District)
Yadhava (including Idaiyar, Telugu Speaking Idaiyar known as Vaduga Ayar or
129.
Vaduga Idaiyar or Golla and Asthanthra Golla)
130. Yavana
131. Yerukula
Converts to Christianity from any Hindu Backward Classes Community or Most
Backward Classes Community or Denotified Communities (except the Converts to
131A
Christianity from Meenavar, Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar,
Mukkuvar or Mukayar and Paravar)
Orphans and destitute children who have lost their parents before reaching the age of
ten and are destitutes; and who have nobody else to take care of them either by law or
132. custom; and also who are admitted into any of the schools or orphanages run by the
Government or recognized by the Government.
48
LIST OF BACKWARD CLASS MUSLIMS
1. Ansar
2. Dekkani Muslims
3. Dudekula
4. Labbais including Rowthar and Marakayar (whether their spoken language is Tamil or
Urdu)
5. Mapilla
6. Sheik
7. Syed
LIST OF MOST BACKWARDS CLASSES
COMMUNITIES
1 Ambalakarar
2 Andipandaram
2(A) Arayar (in Kanniyakumari District)
3 Bestha, Siviar
4 Bhatraju (other than Kshatriya Raju)
5 Boyar, Oddar
6 Dasari
7 Dommara
8 Eravallar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District where the community is a Scheduled Tribe )
9 Isaivellalar
10 Jambuvanodai
11 Jangam
12 Jogi
49
13 Kongu Chettiar (in Coimbatore and Erode Districts only)
14 Koracha
15 Kulala (including Kuyavar and Kumbarar)
16 Kunnuvar Mannadi
17 Kurumba, Kurumba Gounder
18 Kuruhini Chetty
18(A) Latin Catholic Christian Vannar (in Kanniyakumari District)
19 Maruthuvar, Navithar, Mangala, Velakattalavar, Velakatalanair and Pronopakari
20 Mond Golla
21 Moundadan Chetty
22 Mahendra, Medara
23 Mutlakampatti
24 Narikoravar (Kurivikars)
25 Nokkar
25(A) Panisaivan/Panisivan
Vanniakula Kshatriya (including Vanniyar, Vanniya, Vannia Gounder, Gounder or
26
Kander, Padayachi, Palli and Agnikula Kshatriya)
27 Paravar (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi District
where the Community is a Scheduled Caste)
27A Paravar converts to Christianity including the Paravar converts to Christianity of
Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk in Tenkasi District.
28 Meenavar (Parvatharajakulam, Pattanavar, Sembadavar) (including converts to
Christianity )
29 Mukkuvar or Mukayar (including converts to Christianity)
30 Punnan Vettuva Gounder
31 Pannayar (other than Kathikarar in Kanniyakumari District)
32 Sathatha Srivaishnava (including Sathani, Chattadi and Chattada Srivaishnava)
33 Sozhia Chetty
34 Telugupatty Chetty
35 Thottia Naicker ( including Rajakambalam, Gollavar, Sillavar, Thockalavar ,
Thozhuva Naicker and Erragollar)
50
36 Thondaman
36(A) Thoraiyar (Nilgris)
36(B) Thoraiyar (Plains)
36(C) Transgender or Eunuch (Thirunangai or Aravani)
37 Valaiyar (including Chettinad Valayars)
38 Vannar (Salavai Thozhilalar)(including Agasa, Madivala, Ekali, Rajakula, Veluthadar
and Rajaka) (except in Kanniyakumari District and Shencottah Taluk of Tenkasi
District where the community is a Scheduled Caste)
39 Vettaikarar
40 Vettuva Gounder
41 Yogeeswarar
LIST OF DENOTIFIED COMMUNITIES
1 Attur Kilnad Koravars (Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore, Villupuram, kallakurichi,
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga and Virudhunagar Districts)
2 Attur Melnad Koravars (Salem and Namakkal District)
3 Appanad Kondayamkottai Maravar (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram,
Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts )
4 Ambalakarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
5 Ambalakkarar (Suriyanur, Tiruchirapalli District)
6 Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, The Nilgiris, Salem,
Namakkal, Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri Districts)
7 Battu Turkas
8 C.K.Koravars (Cuddalore, Villupuram and Kallakurichi Districts)
9 Chakkala (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur,
Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and the Nilgiris Districts)
10 Changyampudi Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
11 Chettinad Valayars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
51
12 Dombs (Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts)
13 Dobba Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
14 Dommars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Vellore,
Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
15 Donga Boya
16 Donga Ur.Korachas
17 Devagudi Talayaris
18 Dobbai Korachas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts )
19 Dabi Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
Tiruvannamalai Districts )
20 Donga Dasaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Chennai, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
21 Gorrela Dodda Boya
22 Gudu Dasaris
23 Gandarvakottai Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Cuddalore, Villupuram and
Kallakurichi Districts)
24 Gandarvakottai Kallars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and
Pudukottai Districts)
25 Inji Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
26 Jogis (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Chennai, Cuddalore, Villupuram,
Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
27 Jambavanodai
28 Kaladis (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul,
Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts )
29 Kal Oddars (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
52
Virudhunagar, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam,
Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli,
Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Salem and Namakkal Districts)
30 Koravars (Kancheepuram , Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Ramanathapuram,
Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Pudukottai,Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai,
Thiravarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi,
Thoothukadi, Chennai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul and The Nilgiris Districts )
31 Kalinji Dabikoravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and
Pudukottai Districts)
32 Kootappal Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
33 Kala Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli,
Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
34 Kalavathila Boyas
35 Kepmaris (Kancheepuram, Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur
Perambalur and Ariyalur Districts )
36 Maravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Pudukottai,
Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi and Toothukudi
Districts)
37 Monda Koravars
38 Monda Golla (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
39 Mutlakampatti (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalaur and Pudukottai Districts)
40 Nokkars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
41 Nellorepet Oddars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
42 Oddars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni and Dindigul Districts)
43 Pedda Boyas (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
44 Ponnai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
45 Piramalai Kallars (Sivaganga, Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Madurai, Theni,
Dindigul, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai and Tiruvarur
Districts)
53
46 Peria Suriyur Kallars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalurand Pudukottai
Districts)
47 Padayachi (Vellayan Kuppam in Cuddalore District and Tennore in Tiruchirapalli
District )
48 Punnan Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts )
49 Servai (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
50 Salem Melnad Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Coimbatore, Erode, Tiruppur,
Pudukottai, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Salem, Namakkal,
Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai Districts)
51 Salem Uppu Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
52 Sakkaraithamadai Koravars (Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and Tiruvannamalai
Districts)
53 Saranga Palli Koravars
54 Sooramari Oddars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
55 Sembanad Maravars (Sivaganga, Virudunagar and Ramanathapuram Districts)
56 Thalli Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
57 Telungapatti Chetis (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
58 Thottia Naickers (Sivaganga , Virudunagar, Ramanathapuram, Kancheepuram,
Chengalpattu, Tiruvallur, Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur,
Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur, Pudukottai, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi,
Thoothukudi, Salem, Namakkal, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet, Tiruvannamalai,
Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
59 Thogamalai Koravars or Kepmaris (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur
and Pudukottai Districts)
60 Uppukoravars or Settipalli Koravars (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam , Mayiladuthurai,
Tiruvarur, Pudukottai, Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Vellore, Tirupathur, Ranipet and
Tiruvannamalai Districts)
61 Urali Gounders (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
54
62 Wayalpad or Nawalpeta Korachas
63 Vaduvarpatti Koravars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Ramanathapuram, Sivaganga,
Virudunagar, Tirunelveli, Tenkasi, Thoothukudi, Tiruchirapalli, Karur,
Perambalur,
Ariyalur and Pudukottai Districts)
64 Valayars (Madurai, Theni, Dindigul, Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur
Pudukottai, Coimbatore, Erode and Tiruppur Districts)
65 Vettaikarar (Thanjavur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladuthurai, Tiruvarur and Pudukottai
Districts)
66 Vetta Koravars (Salem and Namakkal Districts)
67 Varaganeri Koravars (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
68 Vettuva Gounder (Tiruchirapalli, Karur, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Pudukottai
Districts)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED CASTES)
1 Adi Andhra
2 Adi Dravida
3 Adi Karnataka
4 Ajila
5 Aruthathiyar
6 Ayyanavar (in Kanyakumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District)
7 Baira
8 Bakuda
9 Bandi
10 Bellara
11 Bharata (In Kanykumari District and Shenkottah Taluk of Tirunelveli District.
12 Chakkiliyan
13 Chalavadi
14 Chamar, Muchi
55
15 Chandala
16 Cheruman
17 Devendrakula Velalar (Devendrakulanathan, Kadaiyan (excluding in the coastal
areas of Tirunalveli, thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram, Pudukottai, Thanjavur,
Tiruvarur and Nagapattinam district), Kalladi, Kudumban, Pallan, Pannadi,
Vathiriyan)
18 Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano
19 Domban
20 Godagali
21 Godda
22 Gosangi
23 Holeya
24 Jaggali
25 Jambuvulu
26 Kadaiyan (in the districts of Tirunelveli, Thoothukudi, Ramanathapuram,
Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Tiruvarrur and Nagapattinam)
27 Kakkalan (in kanyakumari districts and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
28 -Omitted-
29 Kanakkan, Padanna (in the Nilgiris district)
30 Karimpalan
31 Kavara (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
32 Koliyan
33 Koosa
34 Kootan, Koodan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
district)
35 -Omitted-
36 Kuravan, Sidhanar
37 Madari
38 Madiga
39 Maila
40 Mala
56
41 Mannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
42 Mavilan
43 Mager
44 Mundala
45 Nalakeyava
46 Nayadi
47 Padannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
48 Pagadi
49 -Omitted-
50 Palluvan
51 Pambada
52 Panan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
53 Panchama
54 -Omitted-
55 Panniandi
56 Paraiyan, Parayan, Sambavar
57 Paravan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
58 Pathiyan(in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
59 Pulayan, Cheramar
60 Puthirai Vannan
61 Raneyar
62 Samagara
63 Samban
64 Sapari
65 Semman
66 Thandan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
67 Thoti
68 Tiruvalluvar
69 Vallon
70 Valluvan
57
71 Vannan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
72 -Omitted-
73 Velan
74 Vetan (in Kanyakumari and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli district)
75 Vettiyan
76 Vettuvan (in Kanyakumari district and Shenkottah of Tirunelvelli district)
THE SCHEDULE (SCHEDULED TRIBES) TAMILNADU
1. Adiyan
2. Aranadan
3. Eravallan
4. Irular.
5. Kadar
Kammara (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
6.
District).
Kanikaran, Kanikkar (in Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah and
7.
Ambasamudram taluk of Tirunelveli District).
8. Kaniyan, Kanyan.
9. Kattunayakan.
10. Kochu Velan.
11. Konda Kapus.
12. Kondareddis.
13. Koraga.
14. Kota (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
District).
15. Kudiya, Melakudi.
16. Kurichchan.
17. Kurumbas (in the Nilgiris District).
18. Kurumans.
58
19. MahaMalasar.
20. MalaiArayan.
21. MalaiPandaram.
22. Malai Vedan.
23. Malakkuravan.
24. Malasar.
25. Malayali (in Dharmapuri, Vellore, Pudukottai, Salem, Namakkal, Cuddalore,
Tiruvannamalai, Villupuram, Tiruchirapalli, Karur and Perambalur Districts).
26. Malayakandi.
27. Mannan.
28. Mudugar,Muduvan.
29. Muthuvan.
30. Pallayan.
31. Palliyan.
32. Palliyar.
33. Paniyan.
34. Sholaga.
35. Toda (excluding Kanniyakumari District and Shenkottah taluk of Tirunelveli
District).
36. Uraly.
59