Blood in the semen: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Blood in the semen
Blood in the semen
Blood in the semen is called hematospermia. It may be in amounts too small to be seen except with a microscope, or it may be visible in the ejaculation fluid.
Causes
Most of the time, the cause for blood in the semen is not known. It can be caused by
swelling or infection of the prostate
or seminal vesicles. The problem may occur after a
prostate biopsy
.
Blood in the semen may also be caused by:
Blockage due to enlarged prostate (prostate problems)
Infection of the prostate
Irritation in the urethra (urethritis)
Injury to the urethra
Often, the cause of the problem cannot be found.
Sometimes, the visible blood will last several days to weeks, depending on the cause of the blood and if any clots formed in the seminal vesicles.
Depending on the cause, other symptoms that may occur include:
Blood in the urine
Fever or chills
Lower back pain
Pain with bowel movement
Pain with ejaculation
Pain with urination
Swelling in the scrotum
Swelling or tenderness in the groin area
Tenderness in the scrotum
Home Care
The following steps may help ease discomfort from a
prostate infection
or urinary infection:
Take over-the-counter pain relievers such as ibuprofen or naproxen.
Drink plenty of fluids.
Eat high-fiber foods to make bowel movements easier.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Always contact your health care provider if you notice any blood in your semen.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The provider will perform a physical exam and look for signs of:
Discharge from the urethra
Enlarged or tender prostate
Fever
Swollen lymph nodes
Swollen or tender scrotum
You may need the following tests:
Prostate exam
PSA blood test
Semen analysis
Semen culture
Ultrasound or MRI of the prostate, pelvis or scrotum
Urinalysis
Urine culture
Alternative Names
Semen - bloody; Blood in ejaculation; Hematospermia
Images
Blood in semen
References
Elsamra SE. Evaluation of the urologic patient: history and physical examination. In: Partin AW, Domochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 1.
Kaplan SA. Benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatitis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 114.
O'Connell TX. Hematospermia. In: O'Connell TX, ed.
Instant Work-ups: A Clinical Guide to Medicine
. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 30.
Small EJ. Prostate cancer. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2020:chap 191.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Kelly L. Stratton, MD, FACS, Associate Professor, Department of Urology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bleeding
Prostate Diseases
Testicular Disorders