Pokeweed poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pokeweed poisoning
Pokeweed poisoning
Pokeweed is a flowering plant. Pokeweed poisoning occurs when someone eats pieces of this plant.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Poisonous ingredients include:
Phytolaccatoxin
Phytolaccigenin
Where Found
All parts of the Pokeweed plant are toxic to humans. The highest amounts of poison are found in the roots, leaves, and stems. Small amounts are in the fruit.
Cooked berries and leaves (cooked twice in separate water) can technically be eaten. However, this is never recommended because there is no guarantee that they are safe. The roots should never be eaten.
Symptoms most often appear within 6 hours of ingestion.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Seizures
(convulsions)
Diarrhea, sometimes hemorrhagic (bloody)
Headache
Loss of consciousness (unresponsiveness)
Low blood pressure
Muscle spasms
Nausea and vomiting
Rapid pulse
Slow or difficult breathing
Stomach pain
Weakness
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Name and part of the plant that was eaten, if known
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen through a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator)
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Fluids by IV (through the vein)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Laxatives
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Deaths have been reported. Improper cooking of leaves or eating some of the roots with the leaves can cause serious poisoning. Eating more than 10 uncooked berries can cause serious problems in children.
DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods.
Alternative Names
American nightshade poisoning; Inkberry poisoning; Pigeon Berry poisoning; Pokeberry poisoning; Scoke poisoning; Virginia poke poisoning; Poke salad poisoning
References
Aronson JK. Phytolaccaceae. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier B.V.; 2016:758-758.
Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 65.
Higgins T. Wild plant and mushroom poisoning. In: Higgins T, ed.
Medicine for the Outdoors
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:422-430.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning