Metabolic neuropathies: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Metabolic neuropathies
Metabolic neuropathies
Metabolic neuropathies are nerve disorders that occur with diseases that disrupt the chemical processes in the body.
Causes
Nerve damage can be caused by many different things. Metabolic neuropathy may be caused by:
A problem with the body's ability to use energy, often due to a lack of enough nutrients (nutritional deficiency)
Dangerous substances (toxins) that build up in the body
Diabetes is one of the most common causes of metabolic neuropathies. People who are at the highest risk for nerve damage (
diabetic neuropathy
) from diabetes include those who have:
Damage to the kidneys or eyes
Poorly controlled blood sugar
The longer one has diabetes, the more likely they are to get neuropathy
Other common causes of metabolic neuropathies include:
Alcohol use disorder (
alcoholic neuropathy
)
Low blood sugar (
hypoglycemia
)
Kidney failure
Inherited conditions, such as
porphyria
Severe infection throughout the body (
sepsis
)
Thyroid disease
Liver disease
Vitamin deficiencies (including vitamins
B12
,
B6
,
E
, and
B1
)
Some metabolic disorders are passed down through families (inherited), while others develop due to various diseases.
Symptoms
These symptoms occur because nerves cannot send proper signals to and from your brain:
Difficulty feeling in any area of the body
Difficulty using the arms or hands
Difficulty using the legs or feet
Difficulty walking
Pain, burning feeling, a pins and needles feeling or shooting pains in any area of the body (nerve pain)
Weakness in the face, arms, legs, or other areas of the body
Dysautonomia, which affects the autonomic (involuntary) nervous system, resulting in symptoms such as rapid heart rate, exercise intolerance, low blood pressure when standing, abnormal sweat patterns, stomach problems, abnormal functioning of the pupils of the eye, and poor erection
These symptoms often start in the toes and feet and move up the legs, eventually affecting the hands and arms.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms.
Tests that may be ordered include:
Blood and urine tests
Electrical test of the muscles (
electromyography or EMG
)
Electrical test of
nerve conduction
Nerve tissue biopsy
Treatment
For most metabolic neuropathies, the best treatment is to correct the metabolic problem.
Vitamin deficiencies are treated with diet or with vitamins by mouth or by injection. Abnormal blood sugar level or thyroid function may need medicines to correct the problem. For alcoholic neuropathy, the best treatment is to stop drinking alcohol.
In some cases, pain is treated with medicines that reduce abnormal pain signals from the nerves. In some cases, lotions, creams, or medicated patches can provide relief.
Weakness is often treated with physical therapy. You may need to learn how to use a cane or walker if your balance is affected. You may need special ankle braces to help you walk better.
Support Groups
These groups can provide more information on neuropathy:
Neuropathy Action Foundation --
www.neuropathyaction.org
The Foundation for Peripheral Neuropathy --
www.foundationforpn.org
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook mainly depends on the cause of the disorder. In some cases, the problem can easily be treated. In other cases, the metabolic problem cannot be controlled, and nerves may continue to become damaged.
Possible Complications
Complications that may result include:
Deformity
Injury to feet
Numbness or weakness
Pain
Trouble walking and falls
Prevention
Maintaining a healthy lifestyle can reduce the risk for neuropathy.
Avoid excess alcohol use.
Eat a balanced diet.
Quit smoking.
Visit your provider regularly to find metabolic disorders before neuropathy develops.
If you have neuropathy in your feet, a foot doctor (podiatrist) can teach you how to inspect your feet for signs of injury and infection. Proper fitting shoes can lessen the chance of skin breakdown in sensitive areas of the feet.
Alternative Names
Neuropathy - metabolic
Images
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
Nervous system
References
Goodman BP. Neurologic manifestations of nutritional disorders. In: Aminoff MJ, Josephson SA, eds.
Aminoff's Neurology and General Medicine
. 6th ed. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 15.
Katirji B. Disorders of peripheral nerves. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 106.
Ralph JW, Aminoff MJ. Neuromuscular complications of general medical disorders. In: Aminoff MJ, Josephson SA, eds.
Aminoff's Neurology and General Medicine
. 6th ed. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 60.
Smith AG, Shy ME. Peripheral neuropathies. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 388.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Metabolic Disorders
Peripheral Nerve Disorders