Brain herniation: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Brain herniation
Brain herniation
Brain herniation is the shifting of the brain tissue from one space in the skull to another through various folds and openings.
Causes
Brain herniation occurs when something inside the skull produces pressure that moves brain tissues. This is most often the result of brain swelling or bleeding from a head injury,
stroke
, or brain tumor.
Brain herniation can be a side effect of tumors in the brain, including:
Metastatic brain tumor
Primary brain tumor
Herniation of the brain can also be caused by other factors that lead to increased pressure inside the skull, including:
Collection of pus and other material in the brain, usually from a bacterial or fungal infection (
abscess
)
Bleeding in the brain (hemorrhage)
Buildup of fluid inside the skull that leads to brain swelling (
hydrocephalus
)
Strokes that cause brain swelling
Swelling after
radiation therapy
Defect in brain structure, such as a condition called Arnold-Chiari malformation
Swelling due to loss of oxygen (
hypoxia
) to the brain
Brain herniation can occur:
From side to side or down, under, or across rigid membrane like the tentorium or falx
Through a natural bony opening at the base of the skull called the foramen magnum
Through openings created during brain surgery
Symptoms
Signs and symptoms  of increased pressure inside the skull (that may lead to brain herniation) may include:
High blood pressure
Irregular or slow pulse
Severe headache
Weakness
Cardiac arrest (no pulse)
Loss of consciousness,
coma
Loss of all brainstem reflexes (blinking, gagging, and pupils reacting to light)
Respiratory arrest
(no breathing)
Wide (dilated) pupils and no movement in one or both eyes
Exams and Tests
A brain and nervous system exam shows changes in alertness. Depending on the severity of the herniation and the part of the brain that is being pressed on, there will be problems with one or more brain-related reflexes and nerve functions.
Tests may include:
X-ray
of the skull and neck
CT scan of the head
MRI scan of the head
Blood tests if an abscess or a bleeding disorder is suspected
Treatment
Brain herniation is a medical emergency. The goal of treatment is to save the person's life.
To help reverse or prevent a brain herniation, the medical team will treat increased swelling and pressure in the brain. Treatment may involve:
Placing a drain into the brain to help remove cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Medicines to reduce swelling, especially if there is a brain tumor,  such as mannitol, saline, or other diuretics
Placing a tube in the airway (
endotracheal intubation
) and increasing the breathing rate to reduce the levels of carbon dioxide (CO
2
) in the blood
Removing blood or blood clots if they are raising pressure inside the skull and causing herniation
Removing part of the skull to give the brain more room
Outlook (Prognosis)
People who have a brain herniation usually have a serious brain injury. They may already have a low chance of recovery due to the injury that caused the herniation. When herniation occurs, it further lowers the chance of recovery.
The outlook varies, depending on where in the brain the herniation occurs. Without treatment, death is likely.
There can be damage to parts of the brain that regulate breathing and blood flow. This can rapidly lead to death or brain death.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Brain death
Permanent and significant neurologic problems
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call 911 or the local emergency number or take the person to a hospital emergency room if they develop decreased alertness or other symptoms, especially if there has been a head injury or if the person has a brain tumor or blood vessel problem.
Prevention
Prompt treatment of
increased intracranial pressure
and related disorders may reduce the risk for brain herniation.
Alternative Names
Herniation syndrome; Transtentorial herniation; Uncal herniation; Subfalcine herniation; Tonsillar herniation; Herniation - brain
Patient Instructions
Brain injury - discharge
Images
Brain
Brain herniation
References
Beaumont A. Physiology of the cerebrospinal fluid and intracranial pressure. In: Winn HR, ed.
Youmans and Winn Neurological Surgery
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 69.
Papa L, Goldberg SA. Head trauma. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 33.
Stippler M, Mahavadi A. Craniocerebral trauma. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 62.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Abscess
Brain Tumors
Hydrocephalus
Stroke
Traumatic Brain Injury