Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a genetic disease. It involves broad thumbs and toes, short stature, distinctive facial features, and varying degrees of intellectual disability.
Causes
RTS is a rare condition. Variations in the genes
CREBBP
or
EP300
are seen in some people with this condition.
Some people are missing the gene entirely. This is more typical in people with more severe problems.
Most cases are sporadic (not passed down through families). They are likely due to a new genetic variant that occurs either in the sperm or egg cells, or at the time of conception.
Symptoms
Symptoms include:
Broadening of the thumbs and big toes
Constipation
Excess hair on body (hirsutism)
Heart defects, possibly requiring surgery
Intellectual disability
Seizures
Short stature
that is noticeable after birth
Slow development of cognitive skills
Slow development of motor skills accompanied by low muscle tone
Other signs and symptoms may include:
Absent or extra kidney, and other problems with kidney or bladder
An underdeveloped bone in the midface
Unsteady or stiff walking gait
Downward-slanted eyes
Low-set ears
or malformed ears
Drooping eyelid (
ptosis
)
Cataracts
Coloboma
(a defect in the iris of the eye)
Microcephaly
(excessively small head)
Narrow, small, or recessed mouth with crowded teeth
Prominent or "beaked" nose
Thick and arched eyebrows with long eyelashes
Undescended testicle (
cryptorchidism
), or other testicular problems
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Blood tests and x-rays may also be done.
Genetic tests can be done to determine if the genes involved in this disease are missing or changed.
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for RTS. However, the following treatments can be used to manage problems commonly associated with the condition.
Surgery to repair the bones in the thumbs or toes can sometimes improve grasp or relieve discomfort.
Early intervention programs and special education to address developmental disabilities.
Referral to behavioral specialists and support groups for family members.
Medical treatment for heart defects, hearing loss, and eye abnormalities.
Treatment for constipation and gastroesophageal reflux (GERD).
Support Groups
More information and support for people with RTS and their families can be found at:
Special Friends Foundation --
specialfriends.org
Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome Children's Foundation --
www.facebook.com/RTSCF/
Outlook (Prognosis)
The majority of children can learn to read at an elementary level. The majority of children have delayed motor development, but on average, they learn to walk by 2 1/2 years of age.
Possible Complications
Complications depend on what part of the body is affected. Complications may include:
Feeding problems in infants
Repeated ear infections and hearing loss
Problems with the shape of the heart
Abnormal heartbeat
Scarring of the skin
When to Contact a Medical Professional
An appointment with a geneticist is recommended if your provider finds signs of RTS.
Prevention
Genetic counseling is advised for couples with a family history of this disease who are planning a pregnancy.
Alternative Names
Rubinstein syndrome, RTS
References
Burkardt DD, Graham JM. Abnormal body size and proportion. In: Pyeritz RE, Korf BR, Grody WW, eds.
Emery and Rimoin's Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics and Genomics: Clinical Principles and Applications.
7th ed. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier Academic Press; 2019:chap 4.
Jones KL, Jones MC, Campo MD. Very small stature, not skeletal dysplasia. In: Jones KL, Jones MC, Campo MD, eds.
Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:100-133.
Wynshaw-Boris A, Klein O. Developmental genetics and birth defects. In: Cohn RD, Scherer SW, Hamosh A, eds.
Thompson & Thompson Genetics and Genomics in Medicine
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 15.
Review Date 9/18/2023
Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Associate Professor in Medical Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Developmental Disabilities