Hookworm infection: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hookworm infection
Hookworm infection
Hookworm infection is caused by roundworms. The disease affects the small intestine and lungs.
Causes
The infection is caused by infestation with any of the following roundworms:
Necator americanus
Ancylostoma duodenale
Ancylostoma ceylanicum
Ancylostoma braziliense
The first two roundworms affect humans only. The last two types also occur in animals.
Hookworm disease is common in the moist tropics and subtropics. In developing nations, the disease leads to the death of many children by weakening their immune system and increasing their risk for infections that their bodies would normally fight off.
There is very little risk of getting the disease in the United States because of advances in sanitation and waste control. The important factor in getting the disease is walking barefoot on ground where there are feces of people who are infected with hookworm.
The larvae (immature form of the worm) enter the skin. The larvae move to the lungs via the bloodstream and enter the airways. The worms are about one-half inch (1 centimeter) long.
After traveling up the windpipe, the larvae are swallowed. After the larvae are swallowed, they infect the small intestine. They develop into adult worms and live there for 1 or more years. The worms attach to the intestinal wall and suck blood, which can result in iron deficiency anemia and protein loss. Adult worms and larvae are released in the feces.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Abdominal discomfort
Cough
Diarrhea
Fatigue
Fever
Gas
Itchy rash
Loss of appetite
Nausea, vomiting
Pale skin
Most people have no symptoms once the worms enter the intestines.
Exams and Tests
Tests that can help diagnose the infection include:
Complete blood count
(CBC) with
differential
Stool ova and parasites exam
Treatment
The goals of treatment are to:
Cure the infection
Treat complications of anemia
Improve nutrition
Parasite-killing drugs such as albendazole, mebendazole, or pyrantel pamoate are often prescribed.
Symptoms and complications of anemia are treated, if needed. Your health care provider will likely recommend increasing the amount of
protein in your diet
.
Outlook (Prognosis)
You will have a complete recovery if you get treated before serious complications develop. Treatment gets rid of the infection.
Possible Complications
Health problems that may result from hookworm infection include:
Iron deficiency anemia
, caused by loss of blood
Nutritional deficiencies
Severe protein loss with fluid buildup in the abdomen (
ascites
)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider for an appointment if symptoms of hookworm infection develop.
Prevention
Handwashing and wearing shoes will reduce the likelihood of infection.
Alternative Names
Hookworm disease; Ground itch; Ancylostoma duodenale infection; Necator americanus infection; Parasitic infection - hookworm
Images
Hookworm - mouth of the organism
Hookworm - close-up of the organism
Hookworm - Ancylostoma caninum
Hookworm egg
Hookworm rhabditiform larva
Digestive system organs
References
Diemert DJ. Nematode infections. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 327.
Hotez PJ. Hookworms (
Necator americanus
and
Ancylostoma
spp.). In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 318.
Review Date 8/26/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Parasitic Diseases