Endocarditis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Endocarditis
Endocarditis
Endocarditis is inflammation of the inside lining of the heart chambers and heart valves (endocardium). It is most often caused by a bacterial or, rarely, a fungal infection.
Causes
Endocarditis can involve the heart muscle, heart valves, or lining of the heart. Some people who develop endocarditis have a:
Birth defect of the heart
Damaged or abnormal heart valve
History of endocarditis
New heart valve after surgery
Parenteral (intravenous) drug use disorder or addiction
Long-term intravenous line in place
Endocarditis begins when germs enter the bloodstream and then travel to the heart.
Bacterial infection is the most common cause of endocarditis.
Endocarditis can also be caused by fungi, such as Candida.
In some cases, no cause can be found.
Germs are most likely to enter the bloodstream during:
Central venous access lines
Injection drug use, from the use of unclean (unsterile) needles
Recent dental surgery
Other surgeries or minor procedures to the breathing tract, urinary tract, infected skin, or bones and muscles
Symptoms
Symptoms of endocarditis may develop slowly or suddenly.
Fever
,
chills
, and
sweating
are frequent symptoms. These sometimes can:
Be present for days before any other symptoms appear
Come and go, or be more noticeable at nighttime
You may also have
fatigue
,
weakness
, weight loss, loss of appetite, and aches and pains in the
muscles
or
joints
.
Other signs can include:
Small areas of bleeding under the nails (
splinter hemorrhages
)
Red, painless skin spots on the palms and soles (Janeway lesions)
Red, painful nodes in the pads of the fingers and toes (Osler nodes)
Shortness of breath
with activity
Swelling of feet, legs, abdomen
Exams and Tests
The health care provider may detect a new
heart murmur
, or a change in an existing heart murmur.
An eye exam may show bleeding in the retina and a central area of clearing. This finding is known as Roth spots. There may be small, pinpoint areas of bleeding on the surface of the eye or the eyelids called petechiae.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood culture
to identify the bacteria or fungus that is causing the infection
Complete blood count
(CBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), or
erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR)
An
echocardiogram
to look at the heart valves
Treatment
You may need to be in the hospital to get antibiotics through a vein (IV or intravenously). Blood cultures and tests will help your provider choose the best antibiotic.
You will then need long-term antibiotic therapy.
People most often need therapy for 4 to 6 weeks to kill all the bacteria from the heart chambers and valves.
Antibiotic treatments that are started in the hospital will need to be continued at home.
Surgery to replace the heart valve is often needed when:
The infection is breaking off into little pieces, resulting in strokes or blockages of other arteries.
The person develops heart failure as a result of damaged heart valves.
There is evidence of more severe organ damage (such as heart damage).
Outlook (Prognosis)
Getting treatment for endocarditis right away improves the chances of a good outcome.
More serious problems that may develop include:
Brain abscess
Further damage to the heart valves, causing
heart failure
Spread of the infection to other parts of the body
Stroke
, caused by small clots or pieces of the infection breaking off and traveling to the brain
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you notice the following symptoms during or after treatment:
Blood in urine
Chest pain
Fatigue
Fever that doesn't go away
Fever
Numbness
Weakness
Weight loss
without change in diet
Prevention
The American Heart Association recommends preventive antibiotics for people at risk for infectious endocarditis, such as those with:
Certain
birth defects of the heart
Heart transplant
and valve problems
Prosthetic heart valves (heart valves inserted by a surgeon)
Past history of endocarditis
These people should receive antibiotics when they have:
Dental procedures that are likely to cause bleeding
Procedures involving the breathing tract
Procedures involving the urinary tract
Procedures involving the digestive tract
Procedures on skin infections and soft tissue infections
Alternative Names
Valve infection; Staphylococcus aureus - endocarditis; Enterococcus - endocarditis; Streptococcus viridans - endocarditis; Candida - endocarditis
Patient Instructions
Heart valve surgery - discharge
Images
Infective endocarditis
Heart - section through the middle
Heart - front view
Heart valve surgery - series
Janeway lesion - close-up
Janeway lesion on the finger
Heart valves
References
Baddour LM, Anavekar NS, Crestanello JA, Wilson WR. Infectious endocarditis and infections of indwelling devices. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 80.
Fowler VG, Bayer AS, Baddour LM. Infective endocarditis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 61.
Holland TL, Bayer AS, Fowler VG. Endocarditis and intravascular infections. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 80.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Endocarditis