Smear of duodenal fluid aspirate: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Smear of duodenal fluid aspirate
Smear of duodenal fluid aspirate
Smear of duodenal fluid aspirate is an exam of fluid from the
duodenum
to check for signs of an infection (such as
giardia
or
strongyloides
). Rarely, this test is also done in a newborn to check for biliary atresia.
How the Test is Performed
A sample is taken during an upper endoscopy (
esophagogastroduodenoscopy
, also called an EGD).
How to Prepare for the Test
Do not eat or drink anything for 12 hours before the test.
How the Test will Feel
You will be given medicines to help you relax and sometimes sleep. Occasionally, you may feel a gag sensation, but the medicines used make this test very comfortable. If you get anesthesia, you cannot drive for the rest of the day and will need a ride home from the procedure location.
Why the Test is Performed
The test is done to look for infection of the small bowel. However, it is not often needed. In most cases, this test is only done when a diagnosis cannot be made with other tests.
Normal Results
There should be no disease-causing organisms in the duodenum. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
The results may show the presence of giardia protozoa, the intestinal parasite strongyloides, or another infectious organism.
Risks
The risks of this test include:
Bleeding
Perforation of (poking a hole in) the gastrointestinal tract by the scope
Infection
Some people may not be able to have this test because of other medical conditions.
Considerations
Other tests that are less invasive can often find the source of the infection.
Alternative Names
Duodenal aspirated fluid smear
Images
Duodenum tissue smear
References
Diemert DJ. Nematode infections. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 327.
Dobbs KR, Dent AE. Strongyloidiasis (Strongyloides stercoralis). In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 341.
Mathison BA, Pritt BS. Parasitology. In: Rifai N, Chiu RWK, Young I, Burnham CAD, Wittwer CT, eds.
Tietz Textbook of Laboratory Medicine
. 7th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2023:chap 88.
Review Date 6/11/2024
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Aria - Jefferson Health Torresdale, Jefferson Digestive Diseases Network, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Parasitic Diseases
Small Intestine Disorders