Mediastinal tumor: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Mediastinal tumor
Mediastinal tumor
Mediastinal tumors are growths that form in the mediastinum. This is an area in the middle of the chest that separates the lungs.
Causes
The mediastinum is the part of the chest that lies between the sternum and the spinal column, and between the lungs. This area contains the heart, large blood vessels, windpipe (trachea), thymus gland, esophagus, and connective tissues. The mediastinum is divided into three sections:
Anterior (front)
Middle
Posterior (back)
Mediastinal tumors are rare.
The most common location for tumors in the mediastinum depends on the age of the person. In children, tumors are more common in the posterior mediastinum. These tumors often begin in the nerves and are noncancerous (benign).
Most mediastinal tumors in adults occur in the anterior mediastinum. They are usually cancerous (malignant) lymphomas, germ cell tumors, or thymomas (cancers of the thymus). These tumors are most common in middle aged and older adults.
Symptoms
Almost one half of mediastinal tumors cause no symptoms and are found on a
chest x-ray
done for another reason. Symptoms that do occur are due to pressure on (compression of) local structures and may include:
Chest pain
Fever and chills
Cough
Coughing up blood
(hemoptysis)
Hoarseness
Night sweats
Shortness of breath
Exams and Tests
A medical history and physical exam may show:
Fever
High-pitched breathing sound (
stridor
)
Swollen or tender lymph nodes (
lymphadenopathy
)
Unintentional weight loss
Wheezing
Further tests that may be done include:
Chest x-ray
CT-guided needle biopsy
CT scan of the chest
Mediastinoscopy with biopsy
MRI of the chest
Treatment
Treatment for mediastinal tumors depends on the type of tumor and symptoms:
Thymomas are treated with surgery. It may be followed by
radiation
or
chemotherapy
, depending on the stage of the tumor and the success of the surgery.
Germ cell tumors are usually treated with chemotherapy.
For lymphomas, chemotherapy is the treatment of choice, and is possibly followed by radiation.
For nerve-related tumors of the posterior mediastinum, surgery is the main treatment.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome depends on the type of tumor. Different tumors respond differently to chemotherapy and radiation.
Possible Complications
Complications of mediastinal tumors include:
Spinal cord compression
Spread to nearby structures such as the heart, lining around the heart (pericardium), and great vessels (aorta and vena cava)
Radiation, surgery, and chemotherapy can all have serious complications.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you notice symptoms of a mediastinal tumor.
Alternative Names
Thymoma - mediastinal; Lymphoma - mediastinal
Images
Lungs
References
McCool FD. Diseases of the diaphragm, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 86.
Triplette M, Varghese TK, Cheng GS. Mediastinal tumors and cysts. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 115.
Review Date 6/17/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Chest Injuries and Disorders
Lymphoma
Thymus Cancer