Skin - clammy: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Skin - clammy
Skin - clammy
Clammy skin is cool, moist, and usually
pale
.
Considerations
Clammy skin may be an emergency. Contact your health care provider or call 911 or the local emergency number.
Causes
Causes of clammy skin include:
Anxiety
attack
Heart attack
Heat exhaustion
Internal bleeding
Low blood oxygen levels
Medicine reaction
Sepsis (body-wide infection)
Severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis)
Severe pain
Shock
(low blood pressure)
Home Care
Home care depends on what is causing the clammy skin. Call for medical help if you are not sure.
If you think the person is in shock, lie them down on their back and raise their legs about 12 inches (30 centimeters). Call 911 or the local emergency number or take the person to the hospital.
If the clammy skin may be due to heat exhaustion and the person is awake and can swallow:
Have the person drink plenty of (non-alcoholic, non-caffeinated) fluids
Move the person to a cool, shaded place
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Seek immediate medical help if the person has any of the following signs or symptoms:
Altered medical status or thinking ability
Chest, abdominal, or back pain or discomfort
Headache
Passage of blood in the stool: black stool, bright red or maroon blood
Recurrent or persistent vomiting, especially of blood
Possible illicit drug use
Shortness of breath
Signs of shock (such as confusion, lower level of alertness, or weak pulse)
Always contact your provider or go to the emergency department if the symptoms do not go away quickly.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions about the symptoms and the person's medical history, including:
How quickly did the clammy skin develop?
Has it ever happened before?
Has the person been injured?
Is the person in pain?
Does the person seem anxious or stressed?
Has the person recently been exposed to high temperatures?
What other symptoms are present?
Tests and treatments may include:
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator)
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
The outlook depends on the cause of the clammy skin. Examination and test results will help determine immediate and long-term outlooks.
Alternative Names
Sweat - cold; Clammy skin; Cold sweat
Images
Shock
Heat emergencies
References
Angus DC. Approach to the patient with shock. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 92.
Puskarich MA, Jones AE. Shock. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.
10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 3.
Review Date 2/13/2025
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Sweat