Pregnancy care: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pregnancy care
Pregnancy care
Getting good care before, during, and after your pregnancy is very important. It can help your baby grow and develop and keep you both healthy. It is the best way to be sure your little one gets a head start on a healthy life.
PRENATAL CARE
Good prenatal care includes good nutrition and health habits before and during pregnancy. Ideally, you should talk with your health care provider before you start trying to become pregnant. Here are some things you will need to do:
Choose a provider:
You will want to choose
a provider for your pregnancy and childbirth
. This provider will provide prenatal care, delivery, and postpartum services.
Take folic acid:
If you are considering becoming pregnant, or are pregnant, you should take a supplement with at least 600 micrograms (0.6 mg) of
folic acid
every day. Taking folic acid will decrease the risk for certain birth defects. Prenatal vitamins almost always contain more than 600 micrograms (0.6 mg) of folic acid per capsule or tablet.
You should also:
Talk with your provider about any medicines you take. This includes over-the-counter medicines. You should only take medicines your provider says are safe to take while you are pregnant.
Avoid all alcohol and recreational drug use and limit caffeine.
Quit smoking
, if you smoke.
Go for prenatal visits and tests:
You will see your provider many times during your pregnancy for prenatal care. The number of visits and types of exams you receive will change, depending on where you are in your pregnancy:
First trimester care
Second trimester care
Third trimester care
Talk with your provider about the different tests you may receive during your pregnancy. These tests can help your provider see how your baby is developing and if there are any problems with your pregnancy. These tests may include:
Ultrasound tests
to see how your baby is growing and help establish a due date
Blood glucose tests
to check for gestational diabetes
Blood test to check for normal fetal DNA in your blood
Fetal echocardiography
to check the baby's heart
Amniocentesis
to check for birth defects and genetic problems
Nuchal translucency test
(vaginal ultrasound) to check for problems with the baby's genes
Tests
to check for
sexually transmitted diseases
(such as syphilis, hepatitis B, and HIV) or other infections
Blood type testing such as
Rh
and
ABO
Blood tests for anemia
Blood tests to follow any chronic illness you had before becoming pregnant
Depending on your family history, you may choose to
screen for genetic problems
. There are many things to think about before doing genetic testing. Your provider can help you decide if this is right for you.
If you have a high-risk pregnancy, you may need to see your provider more often and have
additional tests
.
WHAT TO EXPECT DURING PREGNANCY
Your provider will talk with you about how to manage
common pregnancy symptoms
such as:
Morning sickness
Backaches, leg pain, and other
aches and pains during pregnancy
Problems sleeping
Skin and hair changes
Vaginal bleeding in early pregnancy
Your provider will discuss immunizations and vaccines that are important during pregnancy. There are many safe vaccines that can benefit both you and your baby. Talk with your provider to get more up to date information on vaccines.
No two pregnancies are the same. Some women have few or mild symptoms during pregnancy. Many women
work
their full term and
travel
while they are pregnant. Others may have to cut back on their hours or stop working. Some women require
bed rest
for a few days or possibly weeks to continue with a healthy pregnancy.
POSSIBLE PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS
Pregnancy is a complex process. While many women have normal pregnancies, complications can occur. However, having a complication does not mean you will not have a healthy baby. It means your provider will monitor you closely and take special care of you and your baby during the remainder of your term.
Common complications include:
Diabetes during pregnancy (
gestational diabetes
).
High blood pressure during pregnancy (
preeclampsia
). Your provider will talk with you about
how to care for yourself if you have preeclampsia
.
Premature or preterm
changes in the cervix
.
Problems with the placenta. It may
cover the cervix
, pull away from the womb,
or not work as well as it should
.
Vaginal bleeding
.
Early labor
.
Your baby is not growing well.
Your baby has medical problems.
It can be scary to think about possible problems. But it is important to be aware so you can tell your provider if you notice unusual symptoms.
LABOR AND DELIVERY
Talk with your provider about what to expect during labor and delivery. You can make your wishes known by creating a birth plan. Talk with your provider about
what to include in your birth plan
. You may want to include things like:
How you want to
manage pain during labor
, including whether to have an
epidural block
How you feel about
episiotomy
What would happen if you need a
C-section
How you feel about
forceps delivery
or
vacuum-assisted delivery
Who you want with you during delivery
It is also a good idea to make a list of
things to bring to the hospital
. Pack a bag ahead of time so you have it ready to go when you go into labor.
As you get close to your due date, you will notice certain changes. It is not always easy to tell
when you will go into labor
. Your provider can tell you when it is time to come in for an exam or go to the hospital for delivery.
Talk with your provider about what happens if you
pass your due date
. Depending on your age and risk factors, your provider may need to
induce labor
around 39 to 42 weeks.
Once labor begins, you can use a number of
strategies to get through labor
.
WHAT TO EXPECT AFTER YOUR CHILD IS BORN
Having a baby is an exciting and wonderful event. It is also hard work for the mother. You will need to take care of yourself in the first few weeks after delivery. The type of care you will need depends on how you delivered your baby.
If you had a vaginal delivery, you will likely spend
1 to 2 days in the hospital before you go home
.
If you had a C-section, you will likely
stay in the hospital for 2 to 3 days
before going home. Your provider will explain
how to care for yourself at home
as you heal.
If you are able to breastfeed, there are many
benefits to breastfeeding
. It can also help you
lose your pregnancy weight
.
Be patient with yourself as you learn to breastfeed. It can take 2 to 3 weeks to learn the skill of nursing your baby. There is a lot to learn, such as:
How to care for your breasts
Positioning your baby for breastfeeding
How to overcome any breastfeeding problems
Breast milk pumping and storage
Breastfeeding skin and nipple changes
Timing of breastfeeding
Your mood may also be different following the delivery. Being a new mother can put stress on both your body and mind. About 2-3 days after childbirth, some women begin to feel depressed, anxious, and upset. They may feel angry with the new baby, their partners, or other children. They may also cry for no reason and have difficulty sleeping, eating, and making choices. They may question whether they can manage caring for a baby. These feelings, often called the baby blues, may come and go in the first few days after childbirth. Baby blues usually get better within 1-2 weeks without any treatment.
Postpartum depression is a type of depression that causes intense feelings of sadness, anxiety, or anger that keep people from being able to do their daily tasks or form normal relationships with their families. It can start about a month after childbirth, or even up to a year after having a baby. Contact your provider right away if you think you may have postpartum depression.
If you need help, there are
many resources
for new mothers.
WHEN TO CALL YOUR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
Contact your provider if you are pregnant or think you are pregnant and:
You take medicines for diabetes, thyroid disease, seizures, depression, or high blood pressure or any other medical condition
You are not getting prenatal care
You cannot manage common pregnancy symptoms without medicines
You might have been exposed to a sexually transmitted infection, chemicals, radiation, or unusual pollutants
Contact your provider immediately if you are pregnant and you:
Have a fever, chills, or painful urination
Vaginal bleeding
Severe belly pain
Physical or severe emotional trauma
Have your water break (membranes rupture)
Are in the last half of your pregnancy and notice the baby is moving less or not at all
References
Greenberg JM, Narendran V, Brady JM, Nathan AT, Haberman BB. Neonatal morbidities of prenatal and perinatal origin. In: Lockwood CJ, Copel JA, Dugoff L, et al, eds.
Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 73.
Gregory KD, Ramos DE, Steegers-Theunissen RPM. Preconception and prenatal care. In: Landon MB, Galan HL, Jauniaux ERM, et al, eds.
Gabbe's Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 5.
Kumar G. Early pregnancy care. In: Layden EA, Thomson A, Owen P, Madhra M, Magowan BA, eds.
Clinical Obstetrics and Gynaecology
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Limited; 2023:chap 6.
Test Your Knowledge
Test Your Pregnancy Knowledge
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Peter J. Chen, MD, FACOG, Associate Professor of OBGYN at Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Prenatal Care