Fecal culture: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Fecal culture
Fecal culture
A fecal culture is a lab test to find organisms in the stool (feces) that can cause gastrointestinal symptoms and disease.
How the Test is Performed
A stool sample is needed.
There are many ways to collect the sample.
You can collect the sample:
On plastic wrap. Place the wrap loosely over the toilet bowl so that it is held in place by the toilet seat. Put the sample in a clean container given to you by your health care provider.
In a plastic container for the toilet that the lab may give you.
In a test kit that supplies a special toilet tissue. Put it in a clean container given to you by your provider.
Do not mix urine, water, or toilet tissue with the sample.
For children wearing diapers:
Line the diaper with plastic wrap.
Position the plastic wrap so that it will prevent urine and stool from mixing. This will provide a better sample.
Return the sample to the laboratory as soon as possible. Do not include toilet paper or urine in the specimen.
In the lab, a technician places a sample of the specimen in a special dish. The dish is then filled with a gel that boosts the growth of bacteria or other germs. If there is growth, the germs are identified. The lab technician may also do more tests to determine the best treatment.
How to Prepare for the Test
You will get a collection container for the stool specimen. Depending on the stool tests ordered, you may be given multiple collection bottles. They may have different instructions. Read everything ahead of time, and make sure to follow all instructions carefully.
How the Test will Feel
There is no discomfort.
Why the Test is Performed
The test is performed when your health care provider suspects that you may have a gastrointestinal infection. It may be done if you have severe
diarrhea
that does not go away or that keeps coming back.
Normal Results
There are no abnormal bacteria or other organisms in the sample.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may mean you have an
intestinal infection
. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
Risks
There are no risks.
Considerations
Often other stool tests are done in addition to the culture, such as:
Gram stain of stool
Fecal smear
Stool ova and parasites exam
Alternative Names
Stool culture; Culture - stool; Gastroenteritis fecal culture
Images
Fecal occult blood test
Salmonella typhi organism
Yersinia enterocolitica organism
Campylobacter jejuni organism
Clostridioides difficile organism
References
Fleckenstein JM. Approach to the patient with suspected enteric infection. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 262.
Melia JMP, Sears CL. Infectious enteritis and proctocolitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.
11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 110.
Siddiqi HA, Rabinowitz S, Axiotis CA. Laboratory diagnosis of gastrointestinal and pancreatic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 23.
Wojewoda CM, Stempak LM. Medical bacteriology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 57.
Review Date 6/11/2024
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Aria - Jefferson Health Torresdale, Jefferson Digestive Diseases Network, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bowel Movement
Diarrhea
Foodborne Illness
Gastroenteritis