Glucagonoma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Glucagonoma
Glucagonoma
Glucagonoma is a very rare
tumor
of islet cells of the pancreas, which leads to an excess of the hormone glucagon in the blood.
Causes
Glucagonoma is usually cancerous (malignant). The cancer tends to spread and get worse if not treated.
This cancer affects some of the islet cells of the pancreas. As a result, the affected islet cells produce too much of the hormone glucagon.
The cause is unknown. Genetic factors play a role in some cases. A family history of the syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type I (
MEN I
) is a risk factor.
Symptoms
Symptoms of glucagonoma may include any of the following:
Glucose intolerance (body has problem breaking down sugars)
High blood sugar (hyperglycemia)
Diarrhea
Excessive thirst (due to high blood sugar)
Frequent urination (due to high blood sugar)
Increased appetite
Inflamed mouth and tongue
Nighttime (nocturnal) urination
Skin rash on face, abdomen, buttocks, or feet that comes and goes, and moves around (necrolytic migratory erythema)
Weight loss
In most cases, the cancer has already spread to the liver when it is diagnosed.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history and symptoms.
Tests that may be done include:
CT scan of the abdomen
Glucagon level in the blood
Glucose level in the blood
Genetic tests
Treatment
Surgery to remove the tumor before it spreads is usually recommended.
Chemotherapy
may be done when surgery is not possible.
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a
cancer support group
. Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Approximately 60% of these tumors are cancerous. It is common for this cancer to spread to the liver. Only about 20% of people can be cured with surgery.
If the tumor is only in the pancreas and surgery to remove it is successful, people have a 5-year survival rate of 85%.
Possible Complications
The cancer can spread to the liver. High blood sugar level can cause problems with
metabolism
and tissue damage.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you notice symptoms of glucagonoma.
Alternative Names
Glucagonoma syndrome; 4D syndrome; Endocrine-secreting islet cell tumor - glucagonoma
Images
Pancreas
References
Asban A, Patel AJ, Reddy S, Wang T, Balentine CJ, Chen H. Cancer of the endocrine system. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 68.
National Cancer Institute website. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (islet cell tumors) treatment (PDQ) - health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/pancreatic/hp/pnet-treatment-pdq
. Updated August 16, 2024. Accessed October 14, 2024.
Newey PJ, Thakker RV. Endocrine neoplasia syndromes. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 42.
Review Date 10/1/2024
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pancreatic Cancer