Hypogonadism: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hypogonadism
Hypogonadism
Hypogonadism occurs when the body's sex glands (gonads) produce little or no hormones. In men, these glands are the testes. In women, these glands are the ovaries.
Causes
The cause of hypogonadism can be primary (testes or ovaries) or secondary (problem with the pituitary or hypothalamus). In primary hypogonadism, the ovaries or testes themselves do not function properly. Causes of primary hypogonadism include:
Certain
autoimmune disorders
Genetic and developmental disorders
Infection
Iron excess (hemochromatosis)
Liver and kidney disease
Radiation (to the gonads)
Surgery
Trauma
The most common genetic disorders that cause primary hypogonadism are
Turner syndrome
(in women) and
Klinefelter syndrome
(in men).
If you already have other autoimmune disorders you may be at higher risk for autoimmune damage to the gonads. These can include disorders that affect the liver, adrenal glands, and thyroid glands, as well as type 1 diabetes.
In central hypogonadism, the centers in the brain that control the gonads (hypothalamus and pituitary) do not function properly. Causes of central hypogonadism include:
Anorexia nervosa
Bleeding in the area of the pituitary
Taking medicines, such as glucocorticoids and opiates
Stopping anabolic steroids
Genetic problems
Infections
Nutritional deficiencies
Iron excess (
hemochromatosis
)
Radiation (to the pituitary or hypothalamus)
Rapid, significant weight loss (including weight loss after bariatric surgery)
Surgery (skull base surgery near the pituitary)
Trauma
Tumors
A genetic cause of central hypogonadism is
Kallmann syndrome
. Many people with this condition also have a decreased sense of smell.
Menopause is the most common reason for hypogonadism. It is normal in all women and occurs on average around age 50. Testosterone levels decrease in men as they age, as well. The range of normal testosterone in the blood is much lower in a 50 to 60 year-old man than it is in a 20 to 30 year-old man.
Symptoms
Girls who have hypogonadism will not begin menstruating. Hypogonadism can affect their breast development and height. If hypogonadism occurs after puberty, symptoms in women include:
Hot flashes
Energy and mood changes
Menstruation becomes irregular or stops
In boys, hypogonadism affects muscle, beard, genital and voice development. It also leads to growth problems. In men the symptoms are:
Breast enlargement
Muscle loss
Decreased interest in sex (low libido)
If a pituitary or other brain tumor is present (central hypogonadism), there may be:
Headaches or vision loss
Milky breast discharge (from a prolactinoma, a tumor that produces the hormone prolactin)
Symptoms of other hormone deficiencies (such as
hypothyroidism
)
The most common tumors affecting the pituitary are craniopharyngioma in children and prolactinoma adenomas in adults.
Exams and Tests
You may need to have tests to check:
Estrogen level (women)
Follicle stimulating hormone (
FSH level
) and luteinizing hormone (
LH) level
Testosterone level
(men) - interpretation of this test in older men and men who are obese can be difficult so results should be discussed with a hormone specialist (endocrinologist)
Other measures of pituitary function
Other tests may include:
Blood tests for
anemia
and iron level
Genetic tests including a karyotype to check chromosomal number and structure
Prolactin level
(milk hormone)
Sperm count
Thyroid tests
Sometimes imaging tests are needed, such as a
sonogram
of the ovaries. If pituitary disease is suspected, an
MRI
or
CT scan of the brain
may be done.
Treatment
You may need to take hormone-based medicines. Estrogen and progesterone are used for girls and women. The medicines come in the form of a pill or skin patch. Testosterone is used for boys and men. The medicine can be given as a skin patch, skin gel, a solution applied to the armpit, a patch applied to the upper gum, or by injection.
Menopausal symptoms may be treated with estrogen alone (if the woman does not have a uterus) or estrogen and progesterone for a woman who still has a uterus. This is called combination hormone therapy.
In some women, injections or pills can be used to stimulate ovulation. Injections of pituitary hormone may be used to help men produce sperm. Other people may need surgery and radiation therapy if there is a pituitary or hypothalamic cause of the disorder.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Many forms of hypogonadism are treatable and have a good outlook.
Possible Complications
In women, hypogonadism may cause
infertility
. Menopause is a form of hypogonadism that occurs naturally. It can cause hot flashes, vaginal dryness, and irritability as estrogen levels fall. The risk for
osteoporosis
and
heart disease
increase after menopause.
Some women with hypogonadism take
estrogen therapy
, most often those who have early menopause. But long-term use of hormone therapy may increase the risk for breast cancer, blood clots and heart disease (especially in older women). Women should talk with their health care provider about the risks and benefits of menopausal hormone therapy.
In men, hypogonadism results in the loss of sex drive and may cause:
Impotence
Infertility
Osteoporosis
Weakness
Men normally have lower testosterone as they age. However, the decline in hormone levels is much less than in women.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you notice:
Breast discharge
Breast enlargement (men)
Hot flashes (women)
Impotence
Loss of body hair
Loss of menstrual period
Problems getting pregnant
Problems with your sex drive
Weakness
Both men and women should contact their provider if they have headaches or vision problems.
Prevention
Maintaining fitness, normal body weight and healthy eating habits may help in some cases. Other causes may not be preventable.
Alternative Names
Gonadal deficiency; Testicular failure; Ovarian failure; Testosterone - hypogonadism
Images
Gonadotropins
References
Aleksic S, Bartke A, Lamberts SWJ, Milman S. Endocrine function and aging. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, , Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 26.
Ali O, Donohoue PA. Hypofunction of the testes. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 623.
Bhasin S, Brito JP, Cunningham GR, et al. Testosterone therapy in men with hypogonadism: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab
. 2018;103(5):1715-1744. PMID: 29562364
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29562364/
.
Garibaldi LR, Chemaitilly W. Physiology of puberty. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 599.
Swerdloff RS, Wang C. The testis and male hypogonadism, infertility, and sexual dysfunction. In: Goldman L, Cooney CA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 216.
Wierman ME, Arlt W, Basson R, et al. Androgen therapy in women: a reappraisal: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab
. 2014;99(10):3489-3510. PMID: 25279570
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25279570/
.
Review Date 7/21/2024
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Endocrine Diseases