Sneezing: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Sneezing
Sneezing
A sneeze is a sudden, forceful, uncontrolled burst of air through the nose and mouth.
Causes
Sneezing is caused by irritation to the mucous membranes of the nose or throat. It can be very bothersome, but is rarely a sign of a serious problem.
Sneezing can be due to:
Allergy to pollen (
hay fever
), mold, dander, dust
Breathing in corticosteroids or other medicines (from certain nose sprays)
Common cold
,
the flu
, or COVID-19
Medicine withdrawal
Triggers such as dust, air pollution, dry air, spicy foods, strong emotions, certain medicines, and powders
Home Care
Avoiding exposure to
allergens
and triggers are the best way to control sneezing caused by allergies. An allergen is something that causes an allergic reaction.
Tips to reduce your exposure:
Change furnace filters
Remove pets from the home to get rid of animal dander
Use air filters to reduce pollen in the air
Wash linens in hot water (at least 130 °F or 54 °C) to kill dust mites
In some cases, you may need to move out of a home with a mold spore problem.
Sneezing that is not due to an allergy will disappear when the illness or trigger that is causing it is cured, treated, or removed.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if sneezing is affecting your life and home remedies do not work. Also contact your provider if you have signs of a significant infection such as fever or shortness of breath.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will perform a physical exam and look at your nose and throat. You'll be asked about your medical history and symptoms.
Question topics may include:
When the sneezing started
Whether you have other symptoms
If you have allergies
In some cases,
allergy testing
may be needed to find the cause.
Your provider will suggest treatments and lifestyle changes for hay fever symptoms.
Alternative Names
Sternutation; Allergy - sneezing; Hay fever - sneezing; Flu - sneezing; Cold - sneezing; Dust - sneezing
Patient Instructions
Allergic rhinitis - what to ask your doctor - adult
Allergic rhinitis - what to ask your doctor - child
Images
Throat anatomy
References
Cohen YZ. The common cold. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 58.
Corren J, Baroody FM, Togias A. Allergic and nonallergic rhinitis. In: Burks AW, Holgate ST, O'Hehir RE, et al, eds.
Middleton's Allergy Principles and Practice
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 40.
Eccles R. The nose and control of nasal airflow. In: Burks AW, Holgate ST, O'Hehir RE, et al, eds.
Middleton's Allergy Principles and Practice
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 39.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Deborah Pedersen, MD, MS, Allergy & Asthma Care, PC, Taunton, MA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Allergy
Common Cold
Nose Injuries and Disorders