Campho-Phenique overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Campho-Phenique overdose
Campho-Phenique overdose
Campho-Phenique is an over-the-counter medicine used to treat cold sores and insect bites.
Campho-Phenique overdose occurs when someone applies more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine or takes it by mouth. This can be by accident or on purpose. Inhaling a large amount of Campho-Phenique fumes may also cause symptoms.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an overdose, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Campho-Phenique contains both camphor and phenol.
For information on products containing camphor alone, see
camphor overdose
.
Where Found
Both camphor and phenol are in Campho-Phenique. However, camphor and phenol may be found separately in other products.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of a Campho-Phenique overdose in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Irregular breathing
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Little or no urine output
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Burning in the mouth or throat
HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
Collapse
(shock)
Low blood pressure
Rapid pulse
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Coma
(lack of responsiveness)
Convulsions (
seizures
)
Dizziness
Hallucinations
Muscle stiffness or uncontrolled muscle movements
Stupor (confusion and mental slowness)
Twitching facial muscles
SKIN
Bluish-colored lips and fingernails
Skin redness (from applying too much to the skin)
Sweating (extreme)
Yellow skin
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Abdominal pain
Diarrhea
Excessive thirst
Nausea and vomiting
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. For skin irritation or contact with the eyes, flush the area with cool water for 15 minutes.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
When it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
Your provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
Tests may include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain for neurologic symptoms
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Laxatives
Medicine to treat symptoms
Skin and eye irritation may be treated with cool water irrigation and antibiotic cream, ointment, or eyedrops
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Outlook (Prognosis)
Survival past 48 hours often means the person will recover. Seizures and irregular heartbeat may start suddenly, within minutes of exposure, and pose the greatest risk to health and recovery.
Keep all medicines in child-proof containers and out of the reach of children.
References
Aronson JK. Paraffins. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:494-498.
Wang GS, Buchanan JA. Hydrocarbons. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 147.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.