Trichinosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Trichinosis
Trichinosis
Trichinosis is an infection with the roundworm
Trichinella spiralis
.
Causes
Trichinosis is a parasitic disease caused by eating meat that has not been thoroughly cooked and contains cysts (larvae, or immature worms) of
Trichinella spiralis
. This parasite can be found in pig, bear, walrus, fox, rat, horse, and lion.
Wild animals, especially carnivores (meat eaters) or omnivores (animals that eat both meat and plants), should be considered possible sources of roundworm disease. Domestic meat animals raised specifically for eating under US Department of Agriculture (government) guidelines and inspection can be considered safe. For this reason, trichinosis is rare in the United States, but it is a common infection worldwide.
When a person eats meat from an infected animal, trichinella cysts break open in the intestine and grow into adult roundworms. The roundworms produce other worms that move through the gut wall and into the bloodstream. The worms invade muscle tissues, including the heart and diaphragm (the breathing muscle under the lungs). They can also infect the lungs and brain. The resulting cysts can remain alive for years.
Symptoms
Symptoms of trichinosis include:
Abdominal discomfort, cramping
Diarrhea
Facial swelling around the eyes
Fever
Muscle pain
(especially muscle pain with breathing, chewing, or using large muscles)
Muscle weakness
Exams and Tests
Tests to diagnose this condition include:
Blood tests such as
complete blood count
(CBC),
eosinophil count
(a type of white blood cell),
antibody test
, and
creatine kinase level
(an enzyme found in muscle cells)
Muscle biopsy
to check for worms in the muscle
Treatment
Medicines, such as albendazole, can be used to treat infections in the intestines. A mild infection does not usually need treatment. Pain medicine can help relieve muscle soreness after the larvae have invaded the muscles.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most people with trichinosis have no symptoms, and the infection goes away by itself. More severe infections may be difficult to treat, especially if the lungs, heart, or brain are involved.
Possible Complications
Possible complications include:
Brain infection and inflammation
(encephalitis)
Heart failure
from heart muscle inflammation
Heart rhythm problems from heart muscle inflammation
Pneumonia
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have symptoms of trichinosis and you recently ate undercooked or raw meat that might have been contaminated.
Prevention
Freezing pork at a low temperature (5 °F or -15 °C or colder) for 3 to 4 weeks will kill the worms. Freezing wild game meat does not always kill the worms. Smoking, salting, and drying meat are also not reliable methods of killing the worms. Pork and meat from wild animals should be cooked until well done (no traces of pink).
Alternative Names
Parasite infection - trichinosis; Trichiniasis; Trichinellosis; Roundworm - trichinosis
Images
Trichinella spiralis in human muscle
Digestive system organs
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Trichinellosis (Trichinosis). About trichinellosis.
www.cdc.gov/trichinellosis/about/
. Updated September 10, 2024. Accessed November 22, 2024.
Diemert DJ. Nematode infections. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine.
27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 327.
Kazura JW. Tissue nematodes including trichinellosis, dracunculiasis, filariasis, loiasis, and onchocerciasis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 287.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Parasitic Diseases