Tetrahydrozoline poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Tetrahydrozoline poisoning
Tetrahydrozoline poisoning
Tetrahydrozoline is a form of a medicine called imidazoline, which is found in over-the-counter eye drops and nasal sprays. Tetrahydrozoline poisoning occurs when someone swallows this product.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Tetrahydrozoline
Where Found
Tetrahydrozoline is sold under the following brand names:
Eye-Sine
Geneye
Murine Tears Plus
Opti-Clear
Optigene 3
Tyzine
Visine Original and Advanced Relief
Note: This list may not be all inclusive.
While poisoning symptoms are uncommon after applying the drops to the eyes, these agents can produce significant poisoning if taken orally.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Altered mental state
Lack of responsiveness (
coma
)
Difficulty breathing
or no breathing
Blurred vision
Blue lips and fingernails
(cyanosis)
Changes in blood pressure (high at first, low later)
Change in pupil size
Fast or slow heartbeat
Headache
Irritability
Low body temperature
Nausea and vomiting
Nervousness, tremors
Seizures
Weakness
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional.
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
The patient's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
If you go to the emergency room, take the container with you, if possible.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Airway support
, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and ventilator (breathing machine)
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
ECG (
electrocardiogram
, or heart tracing)
Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV)
Laxative
Medicines to treat symptoms
Survival past 24 hours is usually a good sign that the person will recover. Some individuals may have long-lasting complications if multiple organs are damaged by the drug.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Products containing tetrahydrozoline can interact with many prescription medicines. Always read the label before using any over-the-counter (OTC) product.
In young children, serious adverse events can occur from ingesting only a small amount (1 to 2 mL, or several drops) of tetrahydrozoline. Many of these types of OTC products do not have child-resistant closures, so they should be stored out of the reach of children.
Alternative Names
Tetryzoline; Murine; Visine
References
Aronson JK. Tetryzoline. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:793.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning