Respiratory acidosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory acidosis is a condition that occurs when your lungs can't remove all of the carbon dioxide produced by your body. This causes the blood and other body fluids to become too acidic.
Causes
There are many causes of respiratory acidosis, including:
Airway diseases, such as
asthma
and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD)
Diseases that can affect the chest, such as
scoliosis
Diseases that affect the nerves and muscles that signal the lungs to inflate or deflate
Medicines that suppress breathing, including narcotics (opioids), and "downers," such as benzodiazepines, often when combined with each other or alcohol
Severe obesity, which restricts how much the lungs can expand
Obstructive sleep apnea
can cause respiratory acidosis while you are asleep
Chronic respiratory acidosis occurs over a long time. This leads to a stable situation, because the kidneys increase body chemicals, such as bicarbonate, that help restore the body's acid-base balance.
Acute respiratory acidosis occurs when carbon dioxide builds up very quickly, before the kidneys can return the body to a state of balance.
Some people with chronic respiratory acidosis get acute respiratory acidosis when a serious illness worsens their condition and disrupts their body's acid-base balance.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Confusion
Anxiety
Easy fatigue
Lethargy
Shortness of breath
Sleepiness
Tremors
(shaking)
Warm and flushed skin
Sweating
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about symptoms.
You may have certain tests, including:
Arterial
blood gas
(measures oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in the blood)
Basic metabolic panel
Chest x-ray
CT scan of the chest
Pulmonary function test
to measure breathing and how well the lungs are functioning
Ultrasound of the heart (
echocardiogram
)
Treatment
Treatment is aimed at the underlying disease, and may include:
Bronchodilator medicines and corticosteroids to reverse some types of airway obstruction
Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (called
CPAP or BiPAP
)
Oxygen if your blood oxygen level is low
Treatment to
stop smoking
.
Changing medicines when appropriate
If your case is severe, you may need to be put on a breathing machine (ventilator).
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well you do depends on the disease causing the respiratory acidosis.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Poor organ function
Respiratory failure
Shock
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Severe acute respiratory acidosis is a medical emergency. Seek medical help right away if you have symptoms of this condition.
Call your provider if you have symptoms of lung disease that suddenly get worse.
Prevention
Do not smoke. Smoking can lead to many severe lung diseases that can cause respiratory acidosis.
Losing weight may help prevent respiratory acidosis due to obesity (obesity-hypoventilation syndrome).
Be careful about taking sedating medicines, and never combine these medicines with alcohol.
Use your CPAP device regularly if it has been prescribed for you.
Alternative Names
Ventilatory failure; Respiratory failure; Acidosis - respiratory
Images
Respiratory system
References
McCoin NS, Self WH. Acid-base disorders. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 113.
Sanghavi S, Albert TJ, Swenson ER. Acid-base balance. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 12.
Seifter JL. Acid-base disorders. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 104.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Lung Diseases
Respiratory Failure