MIBG scintiscan: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
MIBG scintiscan
MIBG scintiscan
An MIBG scintiscan is a type of imaging test. It uses a radioactive substance called a tracer injected into your body. A subsequent scan can find or confirm the presence of
pheochromocytoma
and
neuroblastoma
. These are types of tumors that affect nerve tissue.
How the Test is Performed
A radioisotope (MIBG, iodine-131-meta-iodobenzylguanidine, or iodine-123-meta-iodobenzylguanidine) is injected into a vein. This compound attaches to specific tumor cells.
You will have the scan later that day or the next day. For this part of the test, you lie on a table under the arm of the scanner. Your abdomen is scanned. You may need to return for repeated scans for 1 to 3 days. Each scan takes 1 to 2 hours.
Before or during the test, you may be given an iodine mixture. This prevents your thyroid gland from absorbing too much of the radioactive substance.
How to Prepare for the Test
You will need to sign an informed consent form. You will be asked to wear a hospital gown or loose-fitting clothes. You will need to remove jewelry or metal objects before each scan. Many drugs interfere with the test. Ask your health care provider which of your regular medicines you may need to stop taking before the test.
How the Test will Feel
You will feel a sharp needle prick when the material is injected. The table may be cold or hard. You must lie still during the scan.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is done to help diagnose pheochromocytoma. It is done when an
abdominal CT scan
or an
abdominal MRI scan
does not give a definite answer. It is also used to help diagnose neuroblastoma and can be used for carcinoid tumors.
Normal Results
There are no signs of a tumor.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may indicate:
Pheochromocytoma
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) II
Carcinoid tumor
Neuroblastoma
Risks
There is some exposure to radiation from the radioisotope. The radiation from this radioisotope is higher than from many others. You may need to take extra precautions for a few days after the test. Your provider will tell you what actions to take.
Before or during the test, you may be given an iodine solution. This will keep your thyroid gland from absorbing too much iodine. Usually people take potassium iodide for 1 day prior and 6 days after. This blocks the thyroid from taking up the MIBG.
This test should not be done on pregnant women. The radiation can pose danger to the unborn baby.
Alternative Names
Adrenal medullary imaging; Meta-iodobenzylguanidine scintiscan; Pheochromocytoma - MIBG; Neuroblastoma - MIBG; Carcinoid MIBG
Images
MIBG injection
References
Cohen DL, Fishbein L. Secondary hypertension: pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. In: Bakris GL, Sorrentino MJ, Laffin LJ, eds.
Hypertension: A Companion to Braunwald's Heart Disease
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 15.
Kutikov A, Crispen PL, Uzzo PG. Pathophysiology, evaluation, and medical management of adrenal disorders. In: Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 106.
Yeh MW, Livhits MJ, Duh Q-Y. The adrenal glands. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 40.
Review Date 7/15/2024
Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, FSIR, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Neuroblastoma
Nuclear Scans
Pheochromocytoma