Phencyclidine overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Phencyclidine overdose
Phencyclidine overdose
Phencyclidine, or
PCP
, is an illegal street drug. It can cause hallucinations and severe agitation. This article discusses overdose due to PCP. An overdose is when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of something, usually a drug. An overdose may result in serious, harmful symptoms or death.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual
overdose
. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Symptoms
Symptoms of PCP overdose include:
Agitation
(overly excited, violent behavior)
Altered state of consciousness
Catatonic trance (person does not talk, move, or react)
Coma
Convulsions
or seizures
Hallucinations
High blood pressure
Side-to-side eye movements
(nystagmus)
Psychosis (loss of contact with reality)
Uncontrolled movement
Lack of coordination
People who have used PCP can be dangerous to themselves and others. DO NOT try to approach an agitated person who you think has used PCP.
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
People being treated for PCP overdose may be sedated and placed in restraints to avoid hurting themselves or medical staff.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
Additional treatment may include:
Activated charcoal, if the drug has been taken by mouth
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan of the brain
ECG
(electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (given through a vein)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome depends on several factors, including:
The amount of PCP in the body
The time between taking the drug and receiving treatment
Recovery from the
psychotic
state may take several weeks. The person should be in a quiet, darkened room. Long-term effects may include kidney failure and seizures. Repeated PCP use may cause long-term psychiatric problems.
Alternative Names
PCP overdose; Angel dust overdose; Sernyl overdose; Wet overdose
References
Aronson JK. Phencyclidine. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs.
16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:670-672.
Barrett W, Iwanicki JL. THC and hallucinogens. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 145.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.