Pregnancy - health risks: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pregnancy - health risks
Pregnancy - health risks
If you are trying to get pregnant, you should try to follow healthy habits. You should stick to these behaviors from the time you are trying to get pregnant all the way through your pregnancy.
Do not smoke tobacco or use illegal drugs.
Stop drinking alcohol.
Limit caffeine and coffee.
Plan healthy eating. If you're not sure how to do this, talk to your health care provider.
Optimize your sleep habits.
Get regular aerobic exercise.
Ask your provider if your weight is optimum.
If your menses are regular, you are probably ovulating. If you've been on birth control pills, consider getting off them for several months before attempting pregnancy.
Talk to your health care provider about any medicines you may be taking to see if they can affect your unborn baby. Eat a well-balanced diet. Take supplemental vitamins with at least 400 mcg (0.4 mg) of folic acid (also known as folate or vitamin B9) a day.
If you have any chronic medical problems (such as
high blood pressure
, kidney problems, or
diabetes
), talk to your provider before trying to get pregnant.
See a prenatal provider before trying to get pregnant or early in the pregnancy. This can help prevent, or detect and control health risks to the mother and unborn baby during pregnancy.
Talk to your provider if you are planning to get pregnant within a year of your or your partner's traveling abroad. This is especially important if traveling to areas where viral or bacterial infections could affect the health of an unborn baby.
Men need to be careful, too. Smoking and alcohol may cause problems with the unborn baby. Smoking, alcohol, and marijuana use have also been shown to lower
sperm counts
.
Images
Ultrasound in pregnancy
Tobacco health risks
Folic acid source
References
Berger DS, West EH. Nutrition during pregnancy. In: Landon MB, Galan HL, Jauniaux ERM, et al, eds.
Gabbe's Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 6.
Gregory KD, Ramos DE, Jauniaux ERM. Preconception and prenatal care. In: Landon MB, Galan HL, Jauniaux ERM, et al, eds.
Gabbe's Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 5.
Mullins EWS, Regan L. Women's health. In: Feather A, Randall D, Waterhouse M, eds.
Kumar and Clarke's Clinical Medicine
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 39.
Test Your Knowledge
Is Your Pregnancy High Risk?
Review Date 7/12/2023
Updated by: John D. Jacobson, MD, Professor Emeritus, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Health Problems in Pregnancy