Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) - children: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) - children
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) - children
Acute myeloid leukemia is a
cancer
of the white blood cells within the blood and bone marrow. Bone marrow is the soft tissue inside bones that generates all blood components including white blood cells. Acute means the cancer develops quickly and myeloid refers to the type of white blood cells that become cancerous.
Both
adults
and children can get acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This article is about AML in children.
Causes
In children, AML is rare.
AML involves cells in the bone marrow that usually become certain types of white blood cells. These leukemia cells build up in the bone marrow and blood, leaving no space for healthy white blood cells, red blood cells, and
platelets
to form. Because there are not enough healthy cells to do their jobs, children with AML are more likely to have:
Anemia
(low level of red blood cells)
Increased risk for bleeding and bruising
Infections
Most of the time, the cause of AML is unknown. In children, some things can increase the risk of developing AML:
Exposure to alcohol or tobacco smoke before birth
A history of certain diseases, such as
aplastic anemia
Certain genetic disorders, such as
Down syndrome
,
neurofibromatosis
, and other rare syndromes
Previous use of certain
chemotherapy
medicines such as cyclophosphamide
Past treatment with
radiation therapy
Having one or more risk factor does not mean your child will develop cancer. Most children who develop AML have no known risk factors.
Symptoms
Symptoms of AML include:
Feeling weak or tired
Bone or joint pain
Frequent infections
Easy bleeding or bruising
Fever with or without an infection
Night sweats
Painless lumps in the neck, armpits, stomach, groin, or other parts of the body that may be blue or purple
Pinpoint red spots (
petechiae
) under the skin caused by bleeding
Shortness of breath
Loss of appetite and eating less food
Exams and Tests
Your child's health care provider will perform the following exams and tests:
Physical exam and health history
Complete blood count
(CBC) and coagulation assay
Blood chemistry study including kidney function tests, and uric acid level
Chest x-ray
Lumbar puncture to look for leukemia cells in the cerebrospinal fluid
Biopsies of the
bone marrow
, or
lymph node
A test to look for changes in the chromosomes in blood or bone marrow
Other tests may be done to determine the specific type of AML.
Treatment
Treatment for children with AML may include:
Anticancer medicines (
chemotherapy
)
Certain types of targeted therapy
Bone marrow transplant
is used if the leukemia returns after treatment or doesn't respond well to initial therapy with chemotherapy. This process uses high doses of chemotherapy and sometimes radiation therapy to treat the leukemia followed by transfusion of bone marrow from a compatible donor.
Supportive care includes red blood cell and platelet (a blood element that helps to stop bleeding) transfusions.
Your child's treatment team will explain the different options to you. You will want to take notes. Be sure to ask questions if you don't understand something.
Support Groups
Having a child with cancer can make you feel very alone. Joining a support group where other parents or families share common experiences may help ease your stress.
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society --
www.lls.org
The National Children's Cancer Society --
thenccs.org/
Outlook (Prognosis)
Cancer can come back at any time. But for most children, AML doesn't come back after being gone for 5 years. However, there is a wide range in outcomes for different subtypes of AML, and the disease might return.
Possible Complications
The leukemia cells can affect various organs in the body including:
Brain
Kidneys
Lungs
Skin
Intestines
As a result of the treatment, it's common to experience:
Fatigue
Hair loss
Weight loss
Mouth sores
Need for transfusions
Infections requiring hospitalization
Infertility
Severe organ damage (very rarely)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your child's provider for an appointment right away if your child develops these symptoms:
Persistent fever
Easy bruising
Shortness of breath
Viral infection that doesn't resolve
Prolonged fatigue
Any other symptoms of AML
Prevention
Many childhood cancers can't be prevented. Most children who develop leukemia have no risk factors.
Alternative Names
Acute myelogenous leukemia - children; AML - children; Acute granulocytic leukemia - children; Acute myeloblastic leukemia - children; Acute non-lymphocytic leukemia (ANLL) - children
References
American Cancer Society website. What is childhood leukemia?
www.cancer.org/cancer/types/leukemia-in-children/about/what-is-childhood-leukemia.html
. Updated February 12, 2019. Accessed August 22, 2024.
National Cancer Institute website. Childhood acute myeloid leukemia treatment (PDQ) - health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/leukemia/hp/child-aml-treatment-pdq
. Updated June 14, 2024. Accessed August 22, 2024.
Redner A, Kessel R. Acute myeloid leukemia. In: Fish JD, Lipton JM, Lanzkowsky P, eds.
Lanzkowsky's Manual of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 19.
Zwaan CM, Heidenreich O, Kolb EA. Acute myeloid leukemia in children. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 63.
Review Date 8/12/2024
Updated by: Rachel Offenbacher, MD, Pediatric Hematology & Oncology, The Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Acute Myeloid Leukemia
Childhood Leukemia