Subarachnoid hemorrhage: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Subarachnoid hemorrhage is bleeding in the area between the brain and the thin tissues that cover the brain. This area is called the subarachnoid space. Subarachnoid bleeding is an emergency and prompt medical attention is needed.
Causes
Subarachnoid hemorrhage can be caused by:
Bleeding from a tangle of blood vessels called an
arteriovenous malformation
(AVM)
Bleeding disorder
Bleeding from a
cerebral aneurysm
(weak area in the wall of a blood vessel that causes the blood vessel to bulge or balloon out)
Head injury
Sickle cell disease
Brain tumors
Cerebral venous thrombosis (blood clot in the veins in the skull)
Unknown cause (idiopathic)
Use of blood thinners
Subarachnoid hemorrhage caused by head injury in older people is often due to falls. Among the young, the most common injury leading to a subarachnoid hemorrhage is motor vehicle crashes. When caused by trauma, subarachnoid hemorrhage commonly occurs with other types of bleeding in the head.
Risk factors include:
Unruptured aneurysm in the brain and other blood vessels
Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) and other connective tissue and autoimmune disorders
High blood pressure
History of
polycystic kidney disease
Smoking
Use of illicit drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamine
Use of blood thinners such as warfarin
A strong family history of aneurysms may also increase your risk.
Symptoms
The main symptom is a severe headache that starts suddenly (often called thunderclap headache). It is often worse near the back of the head. Many people often describe it as the "worst headache ever" and unlike any other type of headache pain. The headache may start after a popping or snapping feeling in the head.
Other symptoms:
Decreased consciousness
and alertness
Eye discomfort in bright light (
photophobia
)
Mood and personality changes, including
confusion
and irritability
Muscle aches (especially neck pain and shoulder pain)
Nausea and vomiting
Numbness in part of the body
Seizure
Stiff neck
Vision problems, including double vision, blind spots, or temporary vision loss in one eye
Other symptoms that may occur with this disease:
Eyelid drooping
Pupil size difference
Sudden stiffening of back and neck, with arching of the back (
opisthotonos
; not very common)
Exams and Tests
Signs include:
A physical exam may show a stiff neck.
A brain and nervous system exam may show signs of decreased nerve and brain function (focal
neurologic deficit
).
An eye exam may show decreased eye movements which may indicate damage to the cranial nerves (in milder cases, an eye exam may show no problems).
If your health care provider thinks you have a subarachnoid hemorrhage, a
head CT scan
(without contrast dye) will be done right away. In some cases, the scan is normal, especially if there has only been a small bleed. If the CT scan is normal, a lumbar puncture (
spinal tap
) may be done. Additional CT scans may be needed for further confirmation.
Other tests that may be done include:
Cerebral angiography
of blood vessels of the brain
CT scan angiography
(using contrast dye)
Transcranial Doppler ultrasound, to look at blood flow in the arteries of the brain
MRI and
magnetic resonance angiography
(MRA) (occasionally)
Blood tests to check for bleeding disorders
Treatment
The goals of treatment are to:
Save your life
Repair the cause of bleeding
Relieve symptoms
Prevent complications such as permanent brain damage (
stroke
)
Prevent future bleeding
Surgery may be done to:
Remove large collections of blood or relieve pressure on the brain if the hemorrhage is due to an injury
Repair the aneurysm if the hemorrhage is due to an aneurysm rupture
If the person is critically ill, surgery may have to wait until the person is more stable.
Surgery may involve:
Craniotomy
(cutting a hole in the skull) and aneurysm clipping, to close the aneurysm
Endovascular coiling
: placing coils in the aneurysm and
stents
in the blood vessel to cage the coils reduces the risk of further bleeding
If no aneurysm is found, the person should be closely watched by a health care team and may need more imaging tests.
Treatment for
com
a or decreased alertness includes:
Draining tube placed in the brain to relieve pressure
Life support
Methods to protect the airway
Special positioning
Special medicines to decrease swelling in the skull
A person who is conscious may need to be on strict bed rest. The person will be told to avoid activities that can increase pressure inside the head, including:
Bending over
Straining
Suddenly changing position
Treatment may also include:
Medicines given through an
IV line
to regulate blood pressure
Medicine to prevent artery spasms
Painkillers and anti-anxiety medicines to relieve headache
Medicines to prevent or treat seizures
Stool softeners or laxatives to prevent straining during bowel movements
Medicines to prevent seizures
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person with subarachnoid hemorrhage does depends on a number of different factors, including:
Location and amount of bleeding
Complications
Older age and more severe symptoms can lead to a poorer outcome.
People can recover completely after treatment. But some people die, even with treatment.
Possible Complications
Repeated bleeding is the most serious complication. If a cerebral aneurysm bleeds for a second time, the outlook is much worse.
Changes in consciousness and alertness due to a subarachnoid hemorrhage may become worse and lead to
coma
or death.
Other complications include:
Complications of surgery
Medicine side effects
Seizures
Stroke
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Go to the emergency room or call 911 or the local emergency number if you or someone you know has symptoms of a subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Prevention
The following measures may help prevent subarachnoid hemorrhage:
Stopping smoking
Treating high blood pressure
Identifying and successfully treating an aneurysm
Not using illicit drugs
Alternative Names
Hemorrhage - subarachnoid; Subarachnoid bleeding
Patient Instructions
Headache - what to ask your doctor
References
Chaturvedi S, Selim M. Hemorrhagic cerebrovascular disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 377.
Szeder V, Tateshima S, Jahan R, Saver JL, Duckwiler GR. Intracranial aneurysms and subarachnoid hemorrhage. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 67.
Review Date 2/11/2025
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bleeding
Brain Aneurysm
Hemorrhagic Stroke