17-hydroxycorticosteroids urine test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
17-hydroxycorticosteroids urine test
17-hydroxycorticosteroids urine test
The 17-hydroxycorticosteroids (17-OHCS) test measures the level of 17-OHCS in the urine.
How the Test is Performed
A 24-hour urine sample is needed. You will need to
collect your urine over 24 hours
. Your health care provider will tell you how to do this. Follow instructions exactly.
How to Prepare for the Test
Your provider will instruct you, if necessary, to stop medicines that may interfere with the test. These may include:
Birth control pills that contain estrogen
Certain antibiotics
Glucocorticoids
How the Test will Feel
The test involves only normal urination. There is no discomfort.
Why the Test is Performed
17-OHCS is a product formed when the liver and other body tissues break down the steroid hormone cortisol.
This test can help determine if the body is producing too much cortisol. The test may be used to diagnose
Cushing syndrome
. This is a disorder that occurs when the body has a constant high level of cortisol.
The urine volume and urine creatinine are often done with 17-OHCS test at the same time. This helps the provider interpret the test.
This test is not done often now. The free
cortisol urine test
is a better screening test for Cushing disease.
Normal Results
Normal values:
Male: 3 to 9 mg/24 hours (8.3 to 25  µmol/24 hours)
Female: 2 to 8 mg/24 hours (5.5 to 22  µmol/24 hours)
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
A higher than normal level of 17-OHCS may indicate:
A type of
Cushing syndrome
caused by a tumor in the adrenal gland that produces cortisol
Depression
Hydrocortisone therapy
Malnutrition
Obesity
Pregnancy
A hormonal cause of severe
high blood pressure
Severe physical or emotional stress
Tumor in the pituitary gland
or elsewhere in the body that releases a hormone called adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
A lower than normal level of 17-OHCS may indicate:
Adrenal glands are not producing enough of their hormones
Pituitary gland is not producing enough of its hormones
Hereditary enzyme deficiency
Previous surgery to remove the adrenal gland
An expected result if part of a standard three- day dexamethasone suppression test
Urinating more than 3 liters a day (polyuria) can make the result of the test high even though cortisol production is normal.
Risks
There are no risks with this test.
Alternative Names
17-OH corticosteroids; 17-OHCS
References
Newell-Price JDC, Auchus RJ. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Auchus, RJ, Goldfine AB, Koenig RJ, Rosen CJ, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology.
14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 15.
Review Date 5/12/2023
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Addison Disease
Adrenal Gland Disorders
Cushing's Syndrome