Ludwig angina: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Ludwig angina
Ludwig angina
Ludwig angina is an infection of the floor of the mouth under the tongue. It is often due to a bacterial infection of the teeth or jaw.
Causes
Ludwig angina is a type of bacterial infection that occurs in the floor of the mouth, under the tongue. It often develops after an infection of the roots of the teeth (such as
tooth abscess
) or a mouth injury.
This condition is uncommon in children.
Symptoms
The infected area swells quickly. This may block the airway or prevent you from swallowing saliva.
Symptoms include:
Breathing difficulty
Difficulty swallowing
Drooling
Unusual speech (sounds like the person has a "hot potato" in the mouth)
Tongue swelling or protrusion of the tongue out of the mouth
Fever
Neck pain
Tooth pain
Neck swelling
Redness of the neck
Other symptoms that may occur with this disease:
Weakness, fatigue, excess tiredness
Confusion or other mental changes
Earache
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will do an exam of your neck and head to look for redness and swelling of the upper neck, under the chin.
The swelling may reach to the floor of the mouth. Your tongue may be swollen or pushed up to the top of your mouth.
You may need a
CT scan
of the head and neck.
A sample of the fluid from the tissue may be sent to the lab to test for bacteria.
Treatment
If the swelling blocks the airway, you need to get emergency medical help right away. A breathing tube may need to be placed through your mouth or nose and into the lungs to restore breathing. You may need to have surgery called a
tracheostomy
that creates an opening through the neck into the windpipe.
Antibiotics are given to fight the infection. They are most often given through a vein until symptoms go away. Antibiotics taken by mouth may be continued until tests show that the bacteria have gone away.
Dental treatment may be needed for tooth infections that cause Ludwig angina.
Surgery may be needed to drain fluids that are causing the swelling.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Ludwig angina can be life threatening. It can be cured with getting treatment to keep the airways open and taking antibiotic medicine.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Airway blockage
Generalized infection (
sepsis
)
Septic shock
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Breathing difficulty is an emergency situation. Go to the emergency room or contact the local emergency number (such as 911) right away.
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of this condition, or if symptoms do not get better after treatment.
Prevention
Visit the dentist for regular checkups.
Treat symptoms of mouth or tooth infection right away.
Alternative Names
Submandibular space infection; Sublingual space infection; Ludwig's angina
Images
Oropharynx
References
Chow AW. Infections of the oral cavity, neck, and head. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 64.
Christian JM, Felts CB, Beckmann NA, Gillespie MB. Deep neck and odontogenic infections. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 9.
Roginski MA, Atchinson PR. Upper respiratory tract infections. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 61.
Review Date 1/29/2025
Updated by: Ashutosh Kacker, MD, FACS,  Professor of Clinical Otolaryngology, Weill Cornell Medical College, and Attending Otolaryngologist, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cellulitis