Developmental milestones record - 2 years: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Developmental milestones record - 2 years
Developmental milestones record - 2 years
Physical and motor skill markers:
Able to turn a door knob.
Can look through a book turning one page at a time.
Can build a tower of 6 to 7 cubes.
Can kick a ball without losing balance.
Can pick up objects while standing, without losing balance. (This often occurs by 15 months. It is a cause for concern if not seen by 2 years.)
Can run with better coordination. (May still have a wide stance.)
May be ready for toilet training.
Should have the first 16 teeth, but the actual number of teeth can vary widely.
At 24 months, will reach about half final adult height.
Sensory and cognitive markers:
Able to put on simple clothes without help. (The child is often better at removing clothes than putting them on.)
Able to communicate needs such as thirst, hunger, need to go to the bathroom.
Can organize phrases of 2 to 3 words.
Can understand 2-step command such as, "Give me the ball and then get your shoes."
Has increased attention span.
Vision is fully developed.
Vocabulary has increased to about 50 to 300 words, but healthy children's vocabulary can vary widely.
Play recommendations:
Allow the child to help around the house and take part in the daily family chores.
Encourage active play and provide enough space for healthy physical activity.
Encourage play that involves building and creativity.
Provide safe copies of adult tools and equipment. Many children like to mimic activities such as cutting the grass or sweeping the floor.
Read to the child.
Try to avoid television watching at this age (recommendation of the American Academy of Pediatrics).
Control both the content and quantity of television and other video device viewing. Limit screen time to 1 hour or less per day. Avoid programming with violent content. Redirect the child to reading or play activities.
Control the type of games the child plays.
Alternative Names
Growth milestones for children - 2 years; Normal childhood growth milestones - 2 years; Childhood growth milestones - 2 years
References
Carter RG, Feigelman S. The second year. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 24.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Learn the signs. Act early. Important milestones: your child by two years.
www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/milestones/milestones-2yr.html
. Updated June 6, 2023. Accessed February 22, 2024.
Goode R, Lawrence A, Reimschisel T. Global developmental delay and regression. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 8.
Healthychildren.org website. Beyond screen time: Help your kids build healthy media use habits.
www.healthychildren.org/English/family-life/Media/Pages/healthy-digital-media-use-habits-for-babies-toddlers-preschoolers.aspx
. Updated July 20, 2022. Accessed March 17, 2024.
Review Date 2/17/2024
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Toddler Development