Hydrocarbon pneumonia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hydrocarbon pneumonia
Hydrocarbon pneumonia
Hydrocarbon pneumonia is caused by drinking or breathing in
gasoline
,
kerosene
,
furniture polish
, paint thinner, or other oily materials or solvents. Many of these hydrocarbons are thin liquids. If you drank one of these hydrocarbons, it is likely some will slip down your windpipe and into your lungs (aspiration) rather than going down your food pipe (esophagus) and into your stomach. This can easily happen if you try to siphon gas out of a gas tank with a hose and your mouth.
Hydrocarbons may be inhaled intentionally for intoxication, especially by adolescents. This is referred to as "huffing."
These products cause fairly rapid changes in the lungs, including inflammation, swelling, and bleeding.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Coma
(lack of responsiveness)
Coughing
or grunting respiration
Blue lips and fingernails
(cyanosis)
Fever
Shortness of breath
Smell of a hydrocarbon product on the breath
Stupor
(decreased level of alertness)
Vomiting
Wheezing
Exams and Tests
At the emergency room, your health care provider will check vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
The following tests and interventions (actions taken for improvement) may be done in the emergency department:
Arterial blood gas (acid-base balance) monitoring
Breathing support, including oxygen, inhalation treatment, breathing tube and ventilator (breathing machine), in severe cases
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Fluids by vein (intravenous or IV)
Blood
metabolic panel
Toxicology screen
Treatment
Those with mild symptoms should be evaluated by providers in an emergency room, but may not require a hospital stay. The minimum observation period after inhalation of a hydrocarbon is 6 hours.
People with moderate and severe symptoms are usually admitted to the hospital, occasionally to an intensive care unit (ICU).
Hospital treatment will likely include continuing some or all of the interventions started in the emergency department. Treatment is mainly supportive to treat any symptoms as there is no antidote that treats hydrocarbon pneumonia.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most children who drink or inhale hydrocarbon products and develop
chemical pneumonitis
(lung inflammation without infection) recover fully following treatment. Highly toxic hydrocarbons may rapidly cause
respiratory
failure and death. Repeated ingestions or inhalations may lead to permanent brain damage (including memory, attention and judgment deficits, chronic confusion,
dementia
and psychiatric problems), liver damage, and other organ damage.
Possible Complications
Complications may include any of the following:
Pleural effusion
(fluid surrounding the lungs)
Pneumothorax
(collapsed lung from huffing)
Secondary bacterial infections
When to Contact a Medical Professional
If you know or suspect that your child has swallowed or inhaled a hydrocarbon product, take them to the emergency room immediately. Do not use ipecac to make the person throw up.
Prevention
If you have young children, be sure to identify and carefully store materials containing hydrocarbons.
Alternative Names
Pneumonia - hydrocarbon
Images
Lungs
References
Kuschner WG, Blanc PD. Acute responses to toxic exposures. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray & Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 103.
Wang GS, Buchanan JA. Hydrocarbons. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.
10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 147.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning