Psoriatic arthritis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Psoriatic arthritis
Psoriatic arthritis
Psoriatic arthritis is a joint problem (
arthritis
) that often occurs with a skin condition called
psoriasis
.
Causes
Psoriasis is a common skin problem that causes red patches on the skin. It is an ongoing (chronic) inflammatory condition. Psoriatic arthritis occurs in 7% to 42% of people with psoriasis. Nail psoriasis is linked to psoriatic arthritis.
In most cases, psoriasis comes before the arthritis. In a few people, the arthritis comes before the skin disease. However, having severe, wide-spread psoriasis appears to increase the chance of getting psoriatic arthritis.
The cause of psoriatic arthritis is not known. Genes, immune system, and environmental factors may play a role. It is likely that the skin and joint diseases have similar causes. However, they may not occur together.
Symptoms
The arthritis may be mild and involve only a few joints. The joints at the end of the fingers or toes may be more affected. Psoriatic arthritis can cause arthritis only on one side of the body or both sides of the body.
In some people, the disease may be severe and affect many joints, including the spine. Symptoms in the spine include stiffness and pain. They most often occur in the lower spine and sacrum.
Some people with psoriatic arthritis may have inflammation of the eyes.
Most of the time, people with psoriatic arthritis have the skin and nail changes of psoriasis. Often, the skin gets worse at the same time as the arthritis.
Tendons may become inflamed with psoriatic arthritis. Examples include the Achilles tendon, the plantar fascia, and the tendon sheath in the hand.
Exams and Tests
During a physical exam, the health care provider will look for:
Joint swelling
Skin patches, usually red and scaly (psoriasis)
Pitting in the nails
Joint tenderness
Inflammation in the eyes
Joint x-rays
may be done.
There are no specific blood tests for psoriatic arthritis or for psoriasis. Tests to check for other types of arthritis may be done:
Rheumatoid factor
Anti-CCP antibodies
The provider may test for a gene called HLA-B27. People with involvement of the spine are more likely to have HLA-B27. Most people who are HLA-B27 positive do not have psoriatic arthritis.
Treatment
Your provider may suggest nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to reduce pain and swelling of the joints.
Arthritis that does not improve with NSAIDs may need to be treated with medicines called disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). These include:
Methotrexate
Leflunomide
Sulfasalazine
Apremilast is another medicine used for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis.
Multiple injectable biologic medicines are effective for progressive psoriatic arthritis that is not controlled with DMARDs. These medicines block proteins involved in the inflammation process. They are often helpful for both the skin disease and the joint disease of psoriatic arthritis.
Additionally, there are two JAK-inhibitors that are approved for psoriatic arthritis: Tofacitinib and Upadacitinib. These medications are given orally.
Very painful joints may be treated with steroid injections. These are used when only one or a few joints are involved. Most experts do not recommend oral corticosteroids for psoriatic arthritis. Their use may worsen psoriasis and interfere with the effect of other medicines.
In rare cases, surgery may be needed to repair or replace damaged joints.
People with inflammation of the eye should see an ophthalmologist.
Your provider may suggest a mix of rest and exercise. Physical therapy may help increase joint movement. You may also use heat and cold therapy.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The disease is sometimes mild and affects only a few joints. However, in many people with psoriatic arthritis damage to joints occurs within the first several years. In some people, very bad arthritis may cause deformities in the hands, feet, and spine.
Most people with psoriatic arthritis who do not improve with NSAIDs should see a rheumatologist, a specialist in arthritis, along with a dermatologist for the psoriasis.
Early treatment can ease pain and prevent joint damage, even in very bad cases.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you develop symptoms of arthritis along with psoriasis.
Alternative Names
Arthritis - psoriatic; Psoriasis - psoriatic arthritis; Spondyloarthritis - psoriatic arthritis; PsA
Images
Psoriasis - guttate on the arms and chest
Psoriasis - guttate on the cheek
References
Gossec L, Kerschbaumer A, Ferreira RJO, et al. EULAR recommendations for the management of psoriatic arthritis with pharmacological therapies: 2023 update
Ann Rheum Dis
2024;83:706-719. PMID: 38499325
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 38499325/
.
Haberman RH, Scher JU. Psoriatic arthritis. In: Firestein GS, McInnes IB, Koretzky GA, Mikuls TR, Neogi T, O'Dell JR, eds.
Firestein & Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 78.
Inman RD, Rahman P. Spondyloarthritis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 244.
Veale DJ, Orr C. Management of psoriatic arthritis. In: Hochberg MC, Gravallese EM, Smolen JS, van der Hejjde D, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.
Rheumatology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 131.
Review Date 1/28/2025
Updated by: Diane M. Horowitz, MD, Rheumatology and Internal Medicine, Northwell Health, Great Neck, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Psoriatic Arthritis