Supranuclear ophthalmoplegia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Supranuclear ophthalmoplegia
Supranuclear ophthalmoplegia
Supranuclear ophthalmoplegia is a condition that affects the movement of the eyes.
Causes
This disorder occurs because the brain is sending and receiving faulty information through the nerves that control eye movement. The nerves themselves are healthy.
People who have this problem often have
progressive supranuclear palsy
(PSP). This is a disorder that affects the way the brain controls movement, including eye movement.
Other disorders that have been associated with this condition include:
Inflammation of the brain (
encephalitis
)
Disease that causes areas deep in the brain, just above the spinal cord, to shrink (
olivopontocerebellar atrophy
)
Disease of the nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord that control voluntary muscle movement (for example,
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
)
Condition that also causes malabsorption disorder of the small intestine as well as other symptoms (
Whipple disease
)
Symptoms
People with supranuclear ophthalmoplegia are unable to move their eyes at will in all directions, especially looking upward.
Depending on what condition may be causing the supranuclear ophthalmoplegia, associated symptoms may include:
Mild
dementia
Stiff and uncoordinated movements like those of
Parkinson disease
Symptoms of disorders associated with supranuclear ophthalmoplegia
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms, focusing on the eyes and nervous system.
Tests will be done to check for diseases linked with supranuclear ophthalmoplegia.
Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) might show shrinking of the brainstem.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the cause and symptoms of the supranuclear ophthalmoplegia.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Outlook depends on the cause of the supranuclear ophthalmoplegia.
Alternative Names
Progressive supranuclear palsy - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Encephalitis - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Olivopontocerebellar atrophy - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Whipple disease - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia; Dementia - supranuclear ophthalmoplegia
References
Lavin PJM, Donahue SP, Longmuir RA. Disorders of supranuclear control of ocular motility. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.
Ophthalmology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 9.14.
Lin CR. Progressive supranuclear palsy. In: Ferri FF, ed.
Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2025
. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 918.e4-918e6.
Ling H. Clinical approach to progressive supranuclear palsy.
J Mov Disord
. 2016;9(1):3-13. PMID: 26828211
www.pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26828211/
.
Rucker JC, Lavin PJM. Neuro-ophthalmology: ocular motor system. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 18.
Review Date 6/13/2024
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Eye Movement Disorders