Centipede: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Centipede
Centipede
This article describes the effects of a centipede bite.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poisoning from a centipede bite. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Centipede venom contains several chemicals including histamine that make up the poison.
Where Found
This poison is found only in centipedes.
Symptoms
Symptoms of a centipede bite are:
Pain in the area of the bite
Swelling
in the area of the bite
Redness in the area of the bite
Lymph node swelling (rare)
Numbness in the area of the bite (rare)
People who are allergic to centipede venom may also have:
Difficulty breathing
Rapid heart rate
Throat swelling
Some centipede bites can be very painful. However, they are not fatal and won't need treatment beyond managing the symptoms.
Home Care
Wash the exposed area with plenty of soap and water. DO NOT use alcohol to wash the area. Wash eyes with plenty of water if any venom gets in them.
Place ice (wrapped in a clean cloth) on the bite for 10 minutes and then off for 10 minutes. Repeat this process. If the person has problems with blood circulation, decrease the time to prevent possible damage to the skin. A trip to the emergency room may not be needed unless the person has an allergic reaction, but contact poison control just to be sure.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
The type of centipede, if possible
Time of the bite
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The wound will be treated as appropriate. If there is an allergic reaction, the person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen (severe allergic reactions may require a tube down the throat and breathing machine, ventilator)
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (IV, through a vein)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
Symptoms most often last for less than 48 hours. In some cases, swelling and tenderness can last as long as 3 weeks or it may go away and come back. Severe
allergic reactions
or bites from exotic types of centipedes may require more treatment, including a hospital stay.
References
Erickson TB, Marquez A. Arthropod envenomation and parasitism. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 41.
Curtis AM, Erickson TB. Venomous animal injuries. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 53.
James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Parasitic infestations, stings, and bites. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology
. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 20.
Warrell DA. Injurious arthropods. In: Ryan ET, Hill DR, Solomon T, Aronson NE, Endy TP, eds.
Hunter's Tropical and Emerging Infectious Diseases
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 138.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.