Corneal ulcers and infections: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Corneal ulcers and infections
Corneal ulcers and infections
The cornea is the clear tissue at the front of the eye. A corneal ulcer is an open sore in the outer layer of the cornea. It is often caused by infection. At first, a corneal ulcer may seem like conjunctivitis, or pink eye.
Causes
Corneal ulcers are most commonly caused by an infection with bacteria, viruses, fungi, or a parasite.
Acanthamoeba keratitis occurs in contact lens users. It is more likely to happen in people who make their own homemade cleaning solutions.
Fungal keratitis can occur after a corneal injury involving plant material. It may also occur in people with a suppressed immune system.
Herpes simplex virus keratitis is a serious viral infection. It may cause repeated attacks that are triggered by stress, exposure to sunlight, or any condition that lowers the immune response.
Corneal ulcers or infections may also be caused by:
Eyelids that do not close all the way, such as with
Bell palsy
Foreign bodies in the eye
Scratches (abrasions) on the eye surface
Severely dry eyes
Severe allergic eye disease
Various inflammatory disorders
Wearing contact lenses, especially soft contacts that are left in overnight, may cause a corneal ulcer.
Watch this video about:
Corneal injury
Symptoms
Symptoms of infections or ulcers of the cornea include:
Blurry or hazy vision
Eye that appears red or bloodshot
Itching and discharge
Sensitivity to light
(photophobia)
Very painful and
watery eyes
White patch on the cornea
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider or eye doctor may do the following tests:
Exam of scrapings from the ulcer
Fluorescein stain of the cornea
Keratometry (measuring the curve of the cornea)
Pupillary reflex response
Refraction test
Slit-lamp examination
Tests for dry eye
Visual acuity
Blood tests to check for inflammatory disorders may also be needed.
Using newer information systems to evaluate photos of corneal ulcers may allow earlier diagnosis and treatment.
Treatment
Treatment for corneal ulcers and infections depends on the cause. Treatment should be started as soon as possible to prevent scarring of the cornea.
If the exact cause is not known, you may be given antibiotic drops that work against many kinds of bacteria.
Once the exact cause is known, you may be given drops that treat bacteria, herpes simplex virus, other viruses, or a fungus. Severe ulcers sometimes require a corneal transplant.
Corticosteroid eye drops may be used to reduce swelling and inflammation in certain conditions.
Your provider may also recommend that you:
Avoid eye makeup.
Do not wear contact lenses at all, especially while asleep.
Take pain medicines.
Wear protective glasses.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Many people recover completely and have only a minor change in vision. However, a corneal ulcer or infection can cause long-term damage and affect vision.
Possible Complications
Untreated corneal ulcers and infections may lead to:
Loss of the eye (rare)
Severe vision loss
Scars on the cornea
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You have symptoms of corneal ulcers or an infection.
You have been diagnosed with this condition and your symptoms become worse after treatment.
Your vision is affected.
You develop eye pain that is severe or becoming worse.
Your eyelids or the skin around your eyes becomes swollen or red.
You have a headache in addition to your other symptoms.
Prevention
Things you can do to prevent the condition include:
Wash your hands well when handling your contact lenses.
Avoid wearing contact lenses overnight.
Get prompt treatment for an eye infection to prevent ulcers from forming.
Alternative Names
Bacterial keratitis; Fungal keratitis; Acanthamoeba keratitis; Herpes simplex keratitis
Images
Eye
References
Azar DT, Hallak J, Barnes SD, Giri P, Pavan-Langston D. Microbial keratitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 113.
Cioffi GA, Liebmann JM. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 391.
Efron N. Corneal staining. In: Efron N, ed.
Contact Lens Complications
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 18.
Keenan JD, McLeod SD. Bacterial keratitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.
Ophthalmology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 4.12.
Tuli SS, Steigleman WA. Herpes simplex keratitis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.
Ophthalmology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 4.15.
Review Date 7/9/2024
Updated by: Audrey Tai, DO, MS, Athena Eye Care, Mission Viejo, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Corneal Disorders
Eye Infections