Child neglect and emotional abuse: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Child neglect and emotional abuse
Child neglect and emotional abuse
Neglect and emotional abuse can cause a child a lot of harm. It is often hard to see or prove this kind of abuse, so other people may be unlikely to help the child. When a child is being
physically
or
sexually
abused, emotional abuse is also often happening to the child.
Symptoms
EMOTIONAL ABUSE
These are examples of emotional abuse:
Not providing the child with a safe environment. The child witnesses violence or severe abuse between parents or adults.
Threatening the child with violence or abandonment.
Constantly criticizing or blaming the child for problems.
The child's parent or caregiver does not show concern for the child, and refuses help from others for the child.
These are signs that a child may be emotionally abused. They may have any of the following:
Problems in school
Eating disorders, leading to weight loss or poor weight gain
Emotional issues such as low self-esteem, depression, and anxiety
Extreme behavior such as acting out, trying hard to please, aggressiveness
Trouble sleeping
Vague physical complaints
CHILD NEGLECT
These are examples of child neglect:
Rejecting the child and not giving the child any love.
Not feeding the child.
Not dressing the child in proper clothing.
Not giving needed medical or dental care.
Leaving a child alone for a long time. This is called abandonment.
These are signs that a child may be neglected. The child may:
Not go to school regularly
Smell bad or be dirty
Tell you that there is no one at home to take care of them
Be depressed, show bizarre behavior, or use alcohol or illicit drugs
Treatment
WHAT YOU CAN DO TO HELP
If you think a child is being abused, contact a health care provider, the police, or child protective services in your city, county or state.
Call 911 or the local emergency number for any child in immediate danger because of abuse or neglect.
You can also call Childhelp National Child Abuse Hotline at 1-800-4-A-CHILD (1-800-422-4453). Crisis counselors are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Interpreters are available to help in 170 languages. The counselor on the phone can help you figure out what steps to take next. All calls are anonymous and confidential.
Counseling and support groups
are available for children and for abusive parents who want to get help.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The long-term outcome depends on:
How severe the abuse was
How long the child was abused
The success of therapy and parenting classes
Alternative Names
Neglect - child; Emotional abuse - child
References
American Academy of Pediatrics: healthy children.org website. Child abuse and neglect: AAP policy explained.
www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/at-home/Pages/What-to-Know-about-Child-Abuse.aspx
. Updated August 7, 2024. Accessed November 18, 2024.
Dubowitz H, Lane WG. Abused and neglected children. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.
22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 17.
US Department of Health & Human Services, Children's Bureau website. Child abuse & neglect.
www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/focus-areas/child-abuse-neglect
. Updated June 28, 2024. Accessed November 18, 2024.
Review Date 10/20/2024
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Child Abuse