Fleas: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Fleas
Fleas
Fleas are small insects that feed on the blood of humans, dogs, cats, and other warm-blooded animals.
Causes
Fleas prefer to live on dogs and cats. They may also be found on humans and other warm-blooded animals.
Pet owners may not be affected by fleas until their pet has been gone for a period of time. Fleas look for other sources of food and begin to bite humans.
Symptoms
Bites often occur on the legs and places where clothes fit close to the body, such as the waist, buttocks, thighs, and lower abdomen.
Symptoms of flea bites include:
Small red bumps, often three bumps together, that are very itchy
Blisters
if the person has an allergy to flea bites
Exams and Tests
Usually, a diagnosis can be made when your health care provider examines the skin where the bites are. Questions may be asked about contact with animals such as cats and dogs.
In rare cases, a
skin biopsy
is done to check for other skin problems.
Treatment
You can use an over-the-counter 1% hydrocortisone cream to relieve itching. Antihistamines you can take by mouth may also help with itching.
Possible Complications
Scratching can lead to a skin infection.
Fleas can carry bacteria that cause diseases in humans, such as
typhus
and
plague
. The bacteria can be transmitted to humans by flea bites.
Prevention
Prevention may not always be possible. The goal is to get rid of the fleas. This can be done by treating your home, pets, and outside areas with chemicals (pesticides). Small children should not be in the home when pesticides are being used. Birds and fish must be protected when chemicals are sprayed. Home foggers and flea collars do not always work to get rid of fleas. Always consult your veterinarian for help.
Alternative Names
Pulicosis; Dog fleas; Siphonaptera
Images
Flea
Flea bite - close-up
References
Burkhart CN, Burkhart CG, Morrell DS. Infestations. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds.
Dermatology
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 84.
Dinulos JGH. Infestations and bites. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 15.
James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Parasitic infestations, stings, and bites. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology.
13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 20.
Review Date 10/13/2024
Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Insect Bites and Stings
Pet Health