Hump on upper back (dorsocervical fat pad): MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hump on upper back (dorsocervical fat pad)
Hump on upper back (dorsocervical fat pad)
A hump on the upper back between the shoulder blades is an area of fat accumulation on the back of the neck. The medical name of this condition is dorsocervical fat pad.
Considerations
A hump between the shoulder blades by itself is not a sign of a specific condition. Your health care provider must consider this along with other symptoms and test results.
Causes
Causes of dorsocervical fat pad include any of the following:
Certain medicines used to treat HIV/AIDS
Long-term use of certain glucocorticoid medicines, including prednisone, dexamethasone, and hydrocortisone
Obesity (usually causes more generalized fat deposition)
High level of the hormone cortisol (caused by
Cushing syndrome
)
Certain genetic disorders that cause unusual fat accumulation
Madelung disease (multiple symmetrical lipomatosis) often associated with excess alcohol intake
Osteoporosis
may cause a curvature of the spine in the neck called kyphoscoliosis. This causes an abnormal shape but does not by itself cause excessive fat in the back of the neck.
Home Care
If the hump is caused by a certain medicine, your provider may tell you to stop taking the medicine or change the dosage. Do not stop taking the medicine without first talking to your provider.
Diet and exercise can help you lose weight and may relieve some fat accumulation due to obesity.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Make an appointment with your provider if you have an unexplained hump behind the shoulders.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will perform a physical examination and ask about your medical history and symptoms. Tests may be ordered to determine the cause.
Treatment will be aimed at the problem that caused the fat to develop in the first place.
Alternative Names
Buffalo hump; Dorsocervical fat pad
References
Angelidi AM, Tsoukis MA, Mantzoros CS. Lipodystrophy syndromes. In: Robertson RP, Giudice LC, Grossman AB, et al, eds.
DeGroot's Endocrinology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 24.
Tan SH, Tang MBY, Tey HL. Lipodystrophies. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds.
Dermatology
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 101.
Review Date 5/12/2023
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cushing's Syndrome
Neck Injuries and Disorders
Osteoporosis