Respiratory alkalosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Respiratory alkalosis
Respiratory alkalosis
Respiratory alkalosis is a condition marked by a low level of carbon dioxide in the blood due to breathing excessively.
Causes
Common causes include:
Anxiety or panic
Fever
Overbreathing (
hyperventilation
)
Pregnancy (this is normal)
Pain
Tumor
Trauma
Severe anemia
Liver disease
Central nervous system (brain) abnormalities
Overdose of certain medicines, such as salicylates, progesterone
Any lung disease that leads to shortness of breath can also cause respiratory alkalosis (such as
pulmonary embolism
and
asthma
).
Symptoms
The symptoms may include:
Dizziness
Lightheadedness
Numbness
of the hands and feet
Breathlessness
Confusion
Chest discomfort
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests that may be done include:
Arterial
blood gas
, which measures oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in the blood
Basic metabolic panel
Chest x-ray
CT scan of the chest

Pulmonary function tests
to measure breathing and how well the lungs are functioning
Treatment
Treatment is aimed at the condition that causes respiratory alkalosis. Breathing into a paper bag -- or using a mask that causes you to re-breathe carbon dioxide -- sometimes helps reduce symptoms when anxiety is the main cause of the condition. However, this method has recently been questioned by experts, especially when there is actual lung disease not just anxiety or a panic attack causing the respiratory alkalosis. Ask your provider what approach is best for you.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the condition that is causing the respiratory alkalosis.
Possible Complications
Seizures
may occur if the alkalosis is extremely severe. This is very rare and more likely to happen if the alkalosis is due to increased ventilation from a breathing machine.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have any symptoms of lung disease, such as long-term (chronic) cough or shortness of breath.
Alternative Names
Alkalosis - respiratory
Images
Respiratory system
References
McCoin NS, Self WH. Acid-base disorders. In: Walls RM, eds.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 113.
Sanghavi S, Albert TJ. Acid-base balance. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 12.
Seifter JL. Acid-base disorders. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 104.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Lung Diseases