Developmental milestones record - 3 years: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Developmental milestones record - 3 years
Developmental milestones record - 3 years
This article describes the skills and growth markers that are relevant to 3-year-olds.
Information
These milestones are typical for children in their third year of life. Always keep in mind that some differences are normal. If you have questions about your child's development, contact your child's health care provider.
Physical and motor milestones for a typical 3-year-old include:
Gains about 4 to 5 pounds per year (1.8 to 2.25 kilograms)
Grows about 2 to 3 inches per year (5 to 7.5 centimeters)
Reaches about half of his or her adult height
Has improved balance
Has improved vision (20/30)
Has all 20 primary teeth
Needs 11 to 13 hours of sleep a day
May have daytime control over bowel and bladder functions (may have nighttime control as well)
Can briefly balance and hop on one foot
May walk up stairs with alternating feet (without holding the rail)
Can build a block tower of more than 9 cubes
Can easily place small objects in a small opening
Can copy a circle
Can pedal a tricycle
Sensory, mental, and social milestones include:
Has a vocabulary of several hundred words
Speaks in sentences of 3 words
Counts 3 objects
Uses plurals and pronouns (he/she)
Often asks questions
Can dress self, only needing help with shoelaces, buttons, and other fasteners in awkward places
Can stay focused for a longer period of time
Has a longer attention span
Feeds self easily
Acts out social encounters through play activities
Becomes less afraid when separated from mother or caregiver for short periods of time
Fears imaginary things
Knows own name, age, and sex (boy/girl)
Starts to share
Has some cooperative play (building tower of blocks together)
At age 3, almost all of a
child's speech
should be understandable.
Temper tantrums
are common at this age. Children who have tantrums that often last for more than 15 minutes or that occur more than 3 times a day should be seen by a provider.
Below are ways to encourage a 3-year-old's development include:
Provide a safe play area and constant supervision.
Provide the necessary space for
physical activity
.
Help your child take part in -- and learn the rules of -- sports and games.
Limit both the time and content of
television and computer viewing
.
Visit local areas of interest.
Encourage your child to help with small household chores, such as helping set the table or picking up toys.
Encourage play with other children to help develop social skills.
Encourage creative play.
Read together.
Encourage your child to learn by answering their questions.
Provide activities related to your child's interests.
Encourage your child to use words to express feelings (rather than acting out).
Alternative Names
Normal childhood growth milestones - 3 years; Growth milestones for children - 3 years; Childhood growth milestones - 3 years; Well child - 3 years
References
Carter RG, Feigelman S. The preschool years. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 25.
Whitaker AS, Feigelman S. Assessment of fetal growth and development. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 21.
Review Date 4/17/2024
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Toddler Development