Thyroid cancer - medullary carcinoma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Thyroid cancer - medullary carcinoma
Thyroid cancer - medullary carcinoma
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid is cancer of the thyroid gland that starts in cells that release a hormone called calcitonin. These cells are called "C" cells. The thyroid gland is located inside the front of your lower neck.
Causes
The cause of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (MTC) is unknown. MTC is very rare. It can occur in children and adults.
Unlike other types of thyroid cancer, MTC is less likely to be caused by radiation therapy to the neck given to treat other cancers during childhood.
There are two forms of MTC:
Sporadic MTC, which does not run in families. Most MTCs are sporadic. This form mainly affects older adults.
Hereditary MTC, which runs in families.
You have an increased risk for this type of cancer if you have:
A family history of MTC
A family history of
multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)
A prior history of
pheochromocytoma
, mucosal neuromas,
hyperparathyroidism
or pancreatic endocrine tumors
Other types of thyroid cancer include:
Anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid
Follicular carcinoma of the thyroid
Papillary carcinoma of the thyroid
Thyroid
lymphoma
Symptoms
MTC often begins as a small lump (nodule) in the thyroid gland. There also may be
lymph node swelling
in the neck. As a result, symptoms may include:
Swelling of the neck
Hoarseness
Breathing problems due to narrowing of airways
Cough
Cough with blood
Diarrhea due to high calcitonin level
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and medical history.
Tests that may be used to diagnose MTC include:
Calcitonin
blood test
CEA
blood test
Genetic testing
Thyroid biopsy
Ultrasound of the thyroid
and the lymph nodes of the neck
PET scan
People with MTC should be checked for certain other tumors, especially pheochromocytoma and parathyroid tumors and parathyroid tumors.
Treatment
Treatment involves surgery to remove the thyroid gland and surrounding lymph nodes. Because this is an uncommon tumor, surgery should be performed by a surgeon who is familiar with this type of cancer and experienced with the operation required.
Further treatment will depend on your calcitonin levels. A rise in calcitonin levels again may indicate new growth of the cancer.
Chemotherapy and radiation do not work very well for this type of cancer.
Radiation is used in some people after surgery.
Newer
targeted therapies
may reduce tumor growth also. Your provider can tell you more about these, if needed.
Near relatives of persons diagnosed with hereditary forms of MTC are at increased risk of this cancer and should discuss with their providers.
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a
cancer support group
. Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most people with MTC live at least 5 years after diagnosis, depending upon the stage of the cancer. The 10-year survival rate is 65%.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Cancer spreads to other areas of the body
Parathyroid glands are accidentally removed during surgery
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of MTC.
Prevention
Prevention may not be possible. But, being aware of your risk factors, especially your family history, may allow for early diagnosis and treatment. For people who have a very strong family history of MTC, the option to remove the thyroid gland may be recommended. You should carefully discuss this option with a doctor who is very familiar with the disease.
Alternative Names
Thyroid - medullary carcinoma; Cancer - thyroid (medullary carcinoma); MTC; Thyroid nodule - medullary
Images
Thyroid cancer - CT scan
Thyroid gland
References
Kim M, Kim BH. Current guidelines for management of medullary thyroid carcinoma.
Endocrinol Metab
. 2021;36(3):514-524. PMID: 34154310
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34154310/
.
National Cancer Institute website. Thyroid cancer treatment (PDQ) - health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/thyroid/hp/thyroid-treatment-pdq
. Updated April 11, 2024. Accessed May 3, 2024.
Pearce EN, Hollenberg AN. Thyroid. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 207.
Suh I, Sosa JA. Thyroid. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery
. 21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 37.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Thyroid Cancer