Diskitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Diskitis
Diskitis
Diskitis is swelling (inflammation) and irritation of the space between the bones of the spine (intervertebral disk space).
Causes
Diskitis is an uncommon condition. It is usually seen in children younger than 10 years and in adults around 50 years of age. Men are more often affected than women.
Diskitis can be caused by an infection due to bacteria or a virus. It can also be caused by inflammation, such as from
autoimmune diseases
. Autoimmune diseases are conditions in which the immune system mistakenly attacks certain cells in the body.
Disks in the neck and low back are most commonly affected.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Abdominal pain
Back pain
Difficulty getting up and standing
Fever (typically 102 °F or 38.9 °C or lower)
Increased
curvature of the back
Irritability
Neck pain
Sweating at night
Recent flu-like symptoms
Refusal to sit up, stand, or walk (younger child)
Stiffness in back
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the symptoms.
Tests that may be ordered include any of the following:
Bone scan
Complete blood count (
CBC
)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
or
C-reactive protein
to measure inflammation
MRI
of the spine
X-ray
of the spine
Treatment
The goal is to treat the cause of the inflammation or infection and reduce pain. Treatment may involve any of the following:
Antibiotics if there is an infection caused by bacteria
Anti-inflammatory medicines if the cause is an autoimmune disease
Pain medicines such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Bed rest or a brace to keep the back from moving
Surgery if other methods don't work
Outlook (Prognosis)
Children with an infection should fully recover after treatment. In rare cases, chronic back pain persists.
In cases of autoimmune disease, the outcome depends on the underlying condition. These are often chronic illnesses that need long-term medical care.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Persistent back pain (rare)
Side effects of medicines
Worsening pain with numbness and weakness in your limbs
Formation of abscess in or near the spine
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you or your child has back pain that does not go away, or problems with standing and walking that seem unusual for the child's age.
Alternative Names
Disk inflammation
Images
Skeletal spine
Intervertebral disk
References
Mathew R, Hong DK. Diskitis. In: Long SS, eds.
Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 77.
Williams KD. Infections and tumors of the spine. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, eds.
Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 42.
Review Date 8/27/2024
Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Back Pain