Ibuprofen overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Ibuprofen overdose
Ibuprofen overdose
Ibuprofen is a type of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). Ibuprofen overdose occurs when someone accidentally or intentionally takes more than the recommended amount of this medicine.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual
overdose
. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Ibuprofen is sold over-the-counter and by prescription.
Where Found
Ibuprofen is found in:
Advil
Medipren
Midol
Motrin IB
Nuprin
Pamprin IB
PediaProfen
Rufen
Note: This list may not be all-inclusive.
Symptoms
Symptoms may develop in the following areas:
Eyes, ears, nose, throat, and mouth:
Ringing in the ears
Blurred vision
Heart and blood:
Low blood pressure (shock) and weakness
Kidneys:
Little to no urine production
Lungs:
Breathing -- difficult
Breathing -- slow
Wheezing
Nervous system:
Agitation
,
confusion
, incoherence (not understandable)
Convulsions (
seizures
)
Decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness (
coma
)
Headache
(severe)
Unsteadiness
, movement problems
Skin:
Rash
Sweating
Stomach and intestines:
Diarrhea
Heartburn
Nausea, vomiting
Stomach pain (possible bleeding in the stomach and intestines)
Other:
Chills
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
For more information about America's Poison Centers, go to
poisoncenters.org
.
If you go to the emergency room, take the container with you, if possible.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator)
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
ECG (
electrocardiogram
, or heart tracing)
Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV)
Laxative
Medicines to treat symptoms
Tube through the mouth into the stomach and small intestine to identify and treat internal bleeding (endoscopy)
In rare, serious cases, more treatments may be needed, including kidney dialysis (machine). Most people will be discharged from the emergency department after being observed for a period of time.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Recovery is likely with prompt medical treatment, except in very large overdoses. Some people may develop chronic liver or kidney injury.
Alternative Names
Advil overdose; Nuprin overdose; PediaProfen overdose; Rufen overdose; Motrin overdose
References
Aronson JK. Ibuprofen. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:5-12.
Hatten BW. Aspirin and nonsteroidal agents. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 139.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pain Relievers