Claw hand: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Claw hand
Claw hand
Claw hand is a condition that causes curved or bent fingers. This makes the hand appear like the claw of an animal.
Considerations
Someone can be born with claw hand (congenital), or they can develop it because of certain disorders, such as a nerve injury.
Causes
Causes may include:
Congenital abnormality
Genetic diseases, such as from
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
Nerve damage
in the arm
Scarring after a severe burn of the hand or forearm
Rare infections, such as
leprosy
When to Contact a Medical Professional
If the condition is congenital, it is usually diagnosed at birth.  If you notice claw hand developing, contact your health care provider.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will examine you and look closely at your hands and feet. You will be asked questions about your medical history and symptoms.
The following tests may be done to check for nerve damage:
Electromyography
(EMG) to check the health of the muscles and the nerves that control the muscles
Nerve conduction studies
to check how fast electrical signals move through a nerve
Treatment depends on the cause. It may include:
Splinting
Surgery to fix problems that may be contributing to the claw hand, such as nerve or tendon problems,
joint contractures
, or scar tissue
Tendon transfer (graft)
to allow movement of the hand and wrist
Hand therapy to straighten the fingers
Alternative Names
Ulnar nerve palsy - claw hand; Ulnar nerve dysfunction - claw hand; Ulnar claw
Images
Claw hand
References
Bauer B, Chaise F. Correction of ulnar claw hand and Wartenberg's sign.
Hand Surg Rehabil
. 2022;41S:S118-S127. PMID: 34311132
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34311132/
.
Davis TRC. Tendon transfers for median, radial, and ulnar nerve palsy. In: Wolfe SW, Pederson WC, Kozin SH, Cohen MS.
Green's Operative Hand Surgery
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 31.
Feldscher SB. Therapy management of tendon transfers. In: Skirven TM, Osterman AL, Fedorczyk JM, Amadio PC, Feldscher SB, Shin EK, eds.
Rehabilitation of the Hand and Upper Extremity
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 44.
Review Date 8/27/2024
Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Finger Injuries and Disorders
Hand Injuries and Disorders