Aminoaciduria: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Aminoaciduria
Aminoaciduria
Aminoaciduria is an abnormally high amount of amino acids in the urine. Amino acids are the building blocks for proteins in the body.
How the Test is Performed
clean-catch urine sample
may be needed. This is often done at your health care provider's office or health clinic.
How to Prepare for the Test
Most of the time, you do not need to take special steps before this test. Make sure your provider knows all of the medicines you recently used. If this test is being done on an infant who is breastfeeding, make sure the provider knows what medicines the nursing mother is taking.
How the Test will Feel
The test involves only normal urination.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is done to measure amino acid levels in the urine. There are many different types of amino acids. It is common for some of each kind to be found in the urine. Increased levels of individual amino acids can be a sign of a problem with metabolism.
Normal Results
The specific value is measured in mmol/mol creatinine. The values below represent normal ranges in 24 hours urine for adults.
Alanine: 9 to 98
Arginine: 0 to 8
Asparagine: 10 to 65
Aspartic acid
: 5 to 50
Citrulline: 1 to 22
Cystine: 2 to 12
Glutamic acid: 0 to 21
Glutamine: 11 to 42
Glycine: 17 to 146
Histidine: 49 to 413
Isoleucine: 30 to 186
Leucine: 1 to 9
Lysine: 2 to 16
Methionine: 2 to 53
Ornithine: 1 to 5
Phenylalanine
: 1 to 5
Proline: 3 to 13
Serine: 0 to 9
Taurine: 18 to 89
Threonine: 13 to 587
Tyrosine: 3 to 14
Valine: 3 to 36
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Increased total urine amino acids may be due to:
Alkaptonuria
Canavan disease
Cystinosis
Cystathioninuria
Fructose intolerance
Galactosemia
Hartnup disease
Homocystinuria
Hyperammonemia
Hyperparathyroidism
Maple syrup urine disease
Methylmalonic acidemia
Multiple myeloma
Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency
Osteomalacia
Propionic acidemia
Rickets
Tyrosinemia type 1
Tyrosinemia type 2
Viral
hepatitis
Wilson disease
Considerations
Screening infants for increased levels of amino acids can help detect problems with metabolism. Early treatment for these conditions may prevent complications in the future.
Alternative Names
Amino acids - urine; Urine amino acids
Images
Urine sample
Aminoaciduria urine test
References
Dietzen DJ, Willrich MAV. Amino acids, peptides, and proteins. In: Rifai N, Chiu RWK, Young I, Burnham Carey-Ann D, Wittwer CT, eds.
Tietz Textbook of Laboratory Medicine
. 7th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2023:chap 31.
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM. Defects in metabolism of amino acids. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 103.
Riley RS, McPherson RA. Basic examination of urine. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Elsevier; 2022:chap 29.
Review Date 4/24/2023
Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Associate Professor in Medical Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Newborn Screening