Facial trauma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Facial trauma
Facial trauma
Facial trauma is an injury of the face.  It may include the facial bones such as the upper jaw bone (maxilla).
Causes
Facial injuries can affect the upper jaw, lower jaw, cheek, nose, eye socket, or forehead. They may be caused by blunt force or be the result of a wound.
Common causes of injury to the face include:
Car and motorcycle crashes
Wounds
Sports injuries
Violence
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Changes in feeling over the face
Deformed or uneven face or facial bones
Difficulty breathing through the nose due to swelling and bleeding
Double vision
Missing teeth
Swelling or bruising around the eyes that may cause vision problems
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will perform a physical exam, which may show:
Bleeding from the nose, eyes, or mouth
Nasal blockage
Breaks in the skin (lacerations)
Bruising around the eyes or widening of the distance between the eyes, which may mean injury to the bones between the eye sockets
Changes in vision or the movement of the eyes
Improperly aligned upper and lower teeth
The following may suggest bone fractures:
Abnormal feelings on the cheek
Irregularities of the face that can be felt by touching
Movement of the upper jaw when the head is still
CT scan of the head
and bones of the face may be done.
Treatment
Surgery is done if the injury prevents normal functioning or causes a major deformity.
The goal of treatment is to:
Control bleeding
Create a clear airway
Treat the fracture and fix broken bone segments
Prevent scars, if possible
Prevent long-term double vision or sunken eyes or cheek bones
Rule out other injuries
Treatment should be done as soon as possible if the person is stable and does not have a neck fracture.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most people do very well with proper treatment. More surgery may be needed in 6 to 12 months to correct changes in appearance.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Bleeding
Uneven face
Infection
Brain and nervous system problems
Numbness or weakness
Loss of vision or double vision
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Go to the emergency room or call the local emergency number (such as 911) if you have a severe injury to your face.
Prevention
Wear seat belts while driving.
Use protective head gear when doing work or activities that could injure the face.
Alternative Names
Maxillofacial injury; Midface trauma; Facial injury; LeFort injuries
References
Kellman RM. Maxillofacial trauma. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 20.
Mayersak RJ. Facial trauma. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice.
10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 34.
Nam AJ, Davidson EH, Manson PN. Assessment of the patient with traumatic facial injury. In: Dorafshar AH, Rodriguez ED, Manson PN, eds.
Facial Trauma Surgery
. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 1.1.
Neligan PC, Buck DW, Facial injuries. In: Neligan PC, Buck DW, eds.
Core Procedures in Plastic Surgery
. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 9.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Facial Injuries and Disorders