Gastrointestinal fistula: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Gastrointestinal fistula
Gastrointestinal fistula
A gastrointestinal fistula is an abnormal opening in the stomach or intestines that allows the contents to leak to another part of the body.
Leaks that go through to a part of the intestines are called entero-enteral fistulas.
Leaks that go through to the skin are called enterocutaneous fistulas.
Other organs can be involved, such as the bladder, vagina, anus, and colon.
Causes
Most gastrointestinal fistulas occur after surgery. Other causes include:
Blockage in the intestine
Infection (such as
diverticulitis
)
Crohn disease
Radiation to the abdomen (most often given as part of cancer treatment)
Injury, such as deep wounds from stabbing or gunshot
Swallowing caustic substances (such as
lye
)
Symptoms
Depending on where the leak is, these fistulas may cause
diarrhea
, and poor absorption of nutrients. Your body may not have as much water and fluids as it needs.
Some fistulas may not cause symptoms.
Other fistulas cause intestinal contents to leak through an opening in the skin.
Exams and Tests
Tests may include:
Barium swallow
to examine the stomach or small bowel
Barium enema
to examine the colon
CT scan
or MRI of the abdomen to look for fistulas between loops of the intestines or areas of infection
Fistulogram, in which contrast dye is injected into the opening of the skin of a fistula and x-rays are taken
Treatment
Treatments may include:
Antibiotics
Immune suppressing medicines if the fistula is a result of Crohn disease
Surgery to remove the fistula and part of the intestines if the fistula is not healing
Nutrition through a vein while the fistula heals (in some cases)
Some fistulas close on their own after a few weeks to months.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the person's overall health and how bad the fistula is. People who are otherwise healthy have a very good chance of recovery.
Possible Complications
Fistulas may result in malnutrition and dehydration, depending on their location in the intestine. They may also cause skin problems and infection.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have:
Very bad diarrhea or other major change in bowel habits
Leakage of fluid from an opening on the abdomen or near the anus, particularly if you have recently had abdominal surgery
Alternative Names
Entero-enteral fistula; Enterocutaneous fistula; Fistula - gastrointestinal; Crohn disease - fistula
Images
Digestive system organs
Fistula
References
De Prisco G, Celinski S, Spak CW. Abdominal abscesses and gastrointestinal fistulas. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 29.
Nussbaum MS, McFadden DW. Gastric, duodenal, and small intestinal fistulas. In: Yeo CJ, ed.
Shackleford's Surgery of the Alimentary Tract
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 76.
Review Date 6/11/2024
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Aria - Jefferson Health Torresdale, Jefferson Digestive Diseases Network, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Digestive Diseases
Fistulas