Septic arthritis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Septic arthritis
Septic arthritis
Septic arthritis is
inflammation of a joint
due to a bacterial or fungal infection. Septic arthritis that is due to the bacteria that cause
gonorrhea
, has different symptoms and is called
gonococcal arthritis
.
Causes
Septic arthritis develops when bacteria or other tiny disease-causing organisms (microorganisms) spread through the blood to a joint. It may also occur when the joint is directly infected with a microorganism from an injury or during surgery. Joints that are commonly affected are the knee and hip.
Most cases of
acute
septic arthritis are caused by staphylococcus or streptococcus bacteria.
Chronic septic arthritis (which is less common) is caused by organisms including
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and
Candida albicans
.
The following conditions increase your risk for septic arthritis:
Artificial joint implants
Bacterial infection somewhere else in your body
Presence of bacteria in your blood
Chronic
illness or disease (such as diabetes,
rheumatoid arthritis
, and
sickle cell disease
)
Intravenous (IV) or injection drug use
Medicines that suppress your immune system
Recent joint injury
Recent joint arthroscopy or other joint surgery
Septic arthritis may be seen at any age. In children, it occurs most often in those younger than 3 years. The hip is often the site of infection in infants. Most cases are caused by the bacteria group B streptococcus. Another common cause is
Haemophilus influenza
, especially if the child has not been vaccinated for this bacterium.
Symptoms
Symptoms usually come on quickly. There is a fever and
joint swelling
that is usually in just one joint. There is also intense joint pain, which gets worse with movement.
Symptoms in newborns or infants:
Crying when infected joint is moved (for example, during diaper changes)
Fever
Not able to move the limb with the infected joint (pseudoparalysis)
Fussiness
Symptoms in children and adults:
Not able to move the limb with the infected joint (pseudoparalysis)
Severe joint pain
Joint swelling
Joint redness
Fever
Chills may occur, but are uncommon.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine the joint and ask about the symptoms.
Tests that may be done include:
Aspiration of joint fluid
for cell count, examination of crystals under the microscope, Gram stain, and
culture
Blood culture
X-ray of affected joint
Blood work including
complete blood count
(CBC)
Treatment
Antibiotics are used to treat the infection.
Resting, raising the joint above heart level, and using cool compresses may help relieve pain. After the joint starts to heal, exercising it can help speed up recovery.
If joint (synovial) fluid builds up quickly due to the infection, a needle may be inserted into the joint to withdraw (
aspirate
) the fluid. Severe cases may need surgery to drain the infected joint fluid and irrigate (wash) the joint.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Recovery is good with prompt antibiotic treatment. If treatment is delayed, permanent joint damage may result.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact for an appointment with your provider if you develop symptoms of septic arthritis.
Prevention
Preventive (prophylactic) antibiotics may be helpful for people at high risk.
Alternative Names
Bacterial arthritis; Non-gonococcal bacterial arthritis
Images
Bacteria
References
Cook PP, Siraj DS. Bacterial arthritis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, Koretzky GA, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds.
Firestein & Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 116.
Robinette E, Shah SS. Septic arthritis. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 705.
Review Date 5/19/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Infectious Arthritis