Acute tubular necrosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Acute tubular necrosis
Acute tubular necrosis
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) is a kidney disorder involving damage to the tubule cells of the kidneys, which can lead to
acute kidney failure
. The tubules are tiny ducts in the kidneys that help filter the blood when it passes through the kidneys.
Causes
ATN is often caused by a lack of blood flow and oxygen to the kidney tissues (ischemia of the kidneys). It may also occur if the kidney cells are damaged by a poison or harmful substance.
The internal structures of the kidney, particularly the tissues of the kidney tubule, become damaged or destroyed. ATN is one of the most common structural changes that can lead to acute kidney failure.
ATN is a common cause of kidney failure in people who are in the hospital. Risks for ATN include:
Blood transfusion reaction
Injury or trauma that damages the muscles
Low blood pressure (hypotension) that lasts longer than 30 minutes
Recent major surgery
Septic shock
(serious condition that occurs when a body-wide infection leads to dangerously low blood pressure)
Liver disease and kidney damage caused by diabetes (
diabetic nephropathy
) may make a person more prone to develop ATN.
ATN can also be caused by medicines that are toxic to the kidneys. These medicines include aminoglycoside antibiotics and the antifungal drug amphotericin.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Decreased consciousness
, coma,
delirium
or
confusion
, drowsiness, and lethargy
Decreased urine output
or no urine output
General swelling, fluid retention
Nausea, vomiting
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Your provider may hear abnormal sounds when listening to the heart and lungs with a stethoscope. This is due to too much fluid in the body.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
and serum creatinine
Fractional excretion of sodium
Kidney biopsy
Urinalysis
Urine sodium
Urine specific gravity
and
urine osmolarity
Treatment
In most people, ATN is reversible. The goal of treatment is to prevent life-threatening complications of acute kidney failure
Treatment focuses on preventing the buildup of fluids and wastes, while allowing the kidneys to heal.
Treatment may include any of the following:
Identifying and treating the underlying cause of the problem
Restricting fluid intake
Taking medicines to help control the potassium level in the blood
Medicines taken by mouth or through an IV to help remove fluid from the body
Temporary
dialysis
can remove excess waste and fluids. This can help improve your symptoms so that you feel better. It may also make kidney failure easier to control. Dialysis may not be necessary for all people, but is often lifesaving, especially if
potassium
is dangerously high.
Dialysis may be needed in the following cases:
Decreased mental status
Fluid overload
Increased potassium level
Pericarditis
(inflammation of the sac-like covering around the heart)
Removal of toxins that are dangerous to the kidneys
Total lack of urine production
Uncontrolled buildup of nitrogen waste products
Outlook (Prognosis)
ATN can last for a few days to 6 weeks or more. This may be followed by 1 or 2 days of making an unusually large amount of urine as the kidneys recover. Kidney function often returns to normal, but there may be other serious problems and complications.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if your urine output decreases or stops, or if you develop other symptoms of ATN.
Prevention
Promptly treating conditions that can lead to decreased blood flow as well as decreased oxygen to the kidneys can reduce the risk for ATN.
Blood transfusions are crossmatched to reduce the risk of incompatibility reactions.
Diabetes, liver disorders, and heart problems need to be managed well to reduce the risk for ATN.
If you know you're taking medicine that can injure your kidneys, ask your provider about having your blood level of the medicine checked regularly.
Drink a lot of fluids after having any contrast dyes to allow them to be removed from the body and reduce the risk for kidney damage.
Alternative Names
Necrosis - renal tubular; ATN; Necrosis - acute tubular
Images
Kidney anatomy
Kidney - blood and urine flow
References
Gunning S, Koyner JL. Acute tubular injury and acute tubular necrosis. In: Gilbert S, ed.
National Kidney Foundation Primer on Kidney Diseases
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 32.
Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM. Prevention and management of acute kidney injury. In: Yu ASL, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Taal MW, eds.
Brenner and Rector's The Kidney
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 29.
Review Date 8/28/2023
Updated by: Walead Latif, MD, Nephrologist and Clinical Associate Professor, Rutgers Medical School, Newark, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Kidney Failure