Thrombocytopenia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia means there is an abnormally low amount of platelets. Platelets are parts of the blood that help blood to clot. This condition is sometimes associated with abnormal bleeding.
Causes
Thrombocytopenia is often divided into 3 major causes of low platelets:
Not enough platelets are made in the bone marrow
Increased removal of platelets in the bloodstream
Increased trapping of platelets in the spleen or liver
Your bone marrow may not make enough platelets if you have any of the following conditions:
Aplastic anemia
(disorder in which the bone marrow does not make enough blood cells)
Cancer in the bone marrow, such as
leukemia
Cirrhosis (liver scarring)
Folate deficiency
Infections in the bone marrow (very rare)
Myelodysplastic syndrome
(bone marrow does not make enough blood cells or makes defective cells)
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Use of certain medicines may also lead to a low production of platelets in the bone marrow. The most common example is chemotherapy treatment for cancer.
The following health situations cause a low number of platelets:
Disorder in which the proteins that control blood clotting become over active, most often during a serious illness (
disseminated intravascular coagulation - DIC
)
Drug-induced low platelet count
Enlarged spleen
Disorder in which the immune system destroys platelets (
immune thrombocytopenic purpura - ITP
)
Disorder that causes blood clots to form in small blood vessels, causing a low platelet count (
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura - TTP
)
Symptoms
You may not have any symptoms. Or you may have general symptoms, such as:
Bleeding in the mouth and gums
Bruising
Nosebleeds
Rash
Other symptoms depend on the cause.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history and symptoms. The following tests may be done:
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Blood clotting tests:
partial thromboplastin time
(PTT) and
prothrombin time
(PT)
Other tests that may help diagnose this condition include
bone marrow aspiration
or
biopsy
.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the cause of the condition. In some cases, a transfusion of platelets may be required to stop or prevent bleeding.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome depends on the disorder causing the low platelet counts.
Possible Complications
Severe bleeding (hemorrhage) is the main complication. Bleeding may occur in the brain or gastrointestinal tract.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you experience unexplained bleeding or bruising.
Prevention
Prevention depends on the specific cause.
Alternative Names
Low platelet count - thrombocytopenia
References
Abrams CS. Thrombocytopenia. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 158.
Branchford BR, Samelson-Jones BJ, Flood VH. Platelet and blood vessel disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 533.
Warkentin TE. Thrombocytopenia caused by hypersplenism, platelet destruction, or surgery/hemodilution. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 130.
Zeller MP, Ning S, Arnold DM, Gabe C. Diseases of platelet number: immune thrombocytopenia, neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia, and posttransfusion purpura. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 129.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Platelet Disorders