Tolmetin overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Tolmetin overdose
Tolmetin overdose
Tolmetin is an NSAID (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug). It is used to help relieve pain, tenderness, swelling, and stiffness due to certain types of arthritis or other conditions that cause inflammation, such as sprains or strains.
In the United States, Tolmetin has been discontinued and is no longer available, but it is still used internationally.
Tolmetin
overdose
occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Tolmetin
Where Found
Tolmetin sodium is the generic name of this medicine.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of an overdose of tolmetin in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Rapid breathing
Slow breathing
Wheezing
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Blurred vision
Ringing in the ears
KIDNEYS AND BLADDER
Kidney failure
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Coma
Confusion
Convulsions
Dizziness
Drowsiness
Incoherence (not understandable)
Unsteadiness
STOMACH AND INTESTINAL TRACT
Abdominal pain
Bleeding in the stomach and intestines
Diarrhea
Heartburn
Nausea and vomiting (sometimes bloody)
SKIN
Rash
Home Care
Seek medical help right away and call the poison control center. Standard procedure is to make the person throw up, unless the person is unconscious or having convulsions. The poison control center will tell you what to do.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the medicine and the strength of the medicine, if known
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your
local poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.  This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs
ECG (
electrocardiogram
, or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (IV, through a vein)
Laxative
Medicines to treat symptoms and reverse the effects of the drug
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach (
gastric lavage
)
X-rays (chest or abdomen)
Blood transfusion if stomach bleeding is severe
Outlook (Prognosis)
Recovery is very likely. However, gastrointestinal bleeding may be severe and require blood transfusion. Kidney damage may be permanent. Some people may need endoscopy, placing a tube through the mouth to the stomach, to stop the bleeding. Some may need to use a kidney machine (dialysis) if their kidney function does not return to normal.
Alternative Names
Tolmetin sodium overdose
References
Aronson JK. Tolmetin. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:42-43.
Hatten BW. Aspirin and nonsteroidal agents. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 139.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pain Relievers