Dieffenbachia poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Dieffenbachia poisoning
Dieffenbachia poisoning
Dieffenbachia is a type of house plant with large, colorful leaves. Poisoning can occur if you eat or are exposed to the leaves, stalk, or root of this plant.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Poisonous ingredients include:
Oxalic acid
Asparagine, an amino acid found in this plant
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Blisters in the mouth
Burning in mouth and throat
Diarrhea
Hoarse voice
Increased saliva production
Nausea and vomiting
Pain on swallowing
Redness, swelling, pain, and burning of the eyes, and possible corneal damage
Swelling of mouth and tongue
Blistering and swelling in the mouth may be severe enough to prevent normal speaking and swallowing.
Home Care
Wipe out the mouth with a cold, wet cloth. Rinse the person's eyes and skin well if they touched the plant.
Give the person milk, unless instructed otherwise by poison control or a health care provider. DO NOT give milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow.
Call poison control for more guidance.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Parts of the plant that were eaten, if known
Time swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the plant with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as needed. The person may receive fluids through a vein (IV) and breathing support. Damage to the cornea will require additional treatment, possibly from an eye specialist.
Outlook (Prognosis)
If contact with the person's mouth is not severe, symptoms usually resolve within a few days. For people who do have severe contact with the plant, a longer recovery time may be necessary.
In rare cases, swelling is severe enough to block the airways.
DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods.
Alternative Names
Dumbcane poisoning; Leopard lily poisoning; Tuft root poisoning
References
Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 65.
Lim CS, Aks SE. Plants, herbal medications, and mushrooms. In: Walls RM, , ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 153.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning