Groin pain: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Groin pain
Groin pain
Groin pain refers to discomfort in the area where the abdomen ends and the legs begin. This article focuses on groin pain in men. The terms "groin" and "testicle" are sometimes used interchangeably. But what causes pain in one area does not always cause pain in the other.
Causes
Common causes of groin pain include:
Pulled muscle, tendon, or ligaments in the leg -- This problem often occurs in people who play sports such as hockey, soccer, and football. This condition is sometimes called "sports hernia" although the name is misleading since it is not an actual hernia. It may also involve pain in the testicles. Pain most often improves with rest and medicines.
Hernia
-- This problem occurs when there is a weak spot in the wall of the abdominal muscle that allows internal organs to press through. Surgery is needed to correct the weak spot.
Disease or injury to the hip joint.
Less common causes include:
Inflammation of the
testicle
or
epididymitis
and related structures
Twisting of the spermatic cord that attaches to the testicle (
testicular torsion
)
Tumor of the testicle
Kidney stone
Inflammation of the small or large intestine
Skin infection
Enlarged lymph glands
Urinary tract infection
Problem with the artery or vein in the groin (femoral artery or vein)
Home Care
Home care depends on the cause. Follow your health care provider's recommendations.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You have ongoing groin pain for no reason.
You have burning pain.
You have pain with
swelling of the scrotum
.
Pain affects only one testicle for more than 1 hour, especially if it started suddenly.
You have noticed changes such as a testicular growth or change in skin color.
There is
blood in your urine
.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will do an exam of the groin area and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, such as:
Have you had a recent injury?
Has there been a change in your activity, especially a recent strain, heavy lifting, or similar activity?
When did the groin pain start? Is it getting worse? Does it come and go?
What other symptoms do you have?
Have you been exposed to any sexually transmitted diseases?
Tests that may be performed include:
Blood tests such as a
complete blood count
(CBC) or
blood differential
Ultrasound
or other scan
Urinalysis
Alternative Names
Pain - groin; Lower abdominal pain; Genital pain; Perineal pain
References
Larson CM, Nepple JJ. Athletic pubalgia/core muscle injury and adductor pathology. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.
DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 84.
Reiman MP, Brotzman SB. Groin pain. In: Giangarra CE, Manske RC, eds.
Clinical Orthopaedic Rehabilitation: A Team Approach
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 67.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Kelly L. Stratton, MD, FACS, Associate Professor, Department of Urology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pain