Dextromethorphan overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Dextromethorphan overdose
Dextromethorphan overdose
Dextromethorphan is a medicine that helps stop coughing. It is an opioid substance. Dextromethorphan overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an
overdose
, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Dextromethorphan can be harmful in large amounts.
Where Found
Dextromethorphan is found in many over-the-counter cough and cold medicines, including:
Robitussin DM
Triaminic DM
Rondec DM
Benylin DM
Drixoral
St. Joseph Cough Suppressant
Coricidin
Alka-Seltzer Plus Cold and Cough
NyQuil
DayQuil
TheraFlu
Tylenol Cold
Dimetapp DM
This medicine is also abused and sold on the streets under the names:
Robo
Tussin
Rojo
Orange crush
Triple Cs
Red Devils
Skittles
Dex
Other products may also contain dextromethorphan.
Symptoms
Symptoms of a dextromethorphan overdose include:
Breathing problems
, including slow and labored breathing, shallow breathing, no breathing (especially in young children)
Bluish-colored fingernails and lips
Blurred vision
Coma
Constipation
Seizures
Drowsiness
Dizziness
Hallucinations
Slow, unsteady walking
High or low blood pressure
Muscle twitches
Nausea and vomiting
Pounding heartbeat (
palpitations
),
rapid heartbeat
Raised body temperature
Spasms
of the stomach and intestines
These symptoms may occur more often or be more severe in people who also take certain other medicines which affect serotonin, a chemical in the brain.
Home Care
This can be a serious overdose. Get medical help right away.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicine to reverse the effect of the narcotic in the medicine (changes in mental state and behavior) and treat other symptoms
Activated charcoal
Laxative
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a breathing machine (ventilator)
Outlook (Prognosis)
This medicine is safe if you take it as directed. However, many teenagers take very high amounts of this medicine to "feel good" and to have hallucinations. Like other medicines of abuse, this can be dangerous. Over-the-counter cough medicines that contain dextromethorphan often contain other medicines that can also be dangerous in an overdose.
Although most people who abuse dextromethorphan will need no treatment, some people will. Survival is based on how quickly a person receives help at a hospital.
Alternative Names
DXM overdose; Robo overdose; Orange crush overdose; Red devils overdose; Triple C's overdose
References
Aronson JK. Dextromethorphan. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:899-905.
Barrett W, Iwanicki JL. THC and hallucinogens. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 150.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cold and Cough Medicines