Drug-induced lupus erythematosus: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Drug-induced lupus erythematosus
Drug-induced lupus erythematosus
Drug-induced lupus erythematosus is an
autoimmune disorder
that is triggered by a reaction to a medicine.
Causes
Drug-induced lupus erythematosus is similar but not identical to
systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). It is an autoimmune disorder. This means your body attacks healthy tissue by mistake. It is caused by a reaction to a medicine. Related conditions are drug-induced cutaneous lupus and drug-induced ANCA vasculitis.
The most common medicines known to cause drug-induced lupus erythematosus are:
Isoniazid
Hydralazine
Procainamide
Tumor-necrosis factor (TNF) alpha inhibitors (such as etanercept, infliximab and adalimumab)
Minocycline
Quinidine
Other less common drugs may also cause the condition. These may include:
Anti-seizure medicines
Capoten
Chlorpromazine
Methyldopa
Sulfasalazine
Levamisole, typically as a contaminant of cocaine
Cancer immunotherapy drugs such as pembrolizumab can also cause a variety of autoimmune reactions including drug-induced lupus.
Symptoms of drug-induced lupus tend to occur after taking the drug for at least 3 to 6 months.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Fever
General ill feeling (malaise)
Joint pain
Joint swelling
Loss of appetite
Pleuritic
chest pain (sharp pain that is worse with breathing in)
Skin rash
on areas exposed to sunlight
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will do a physical exam and listen to your chest with a stethoscope. The provider may hear a sound called a heart friction rub or pleural friction rub.
A skin exam shows a rash.
Joints
may be swollen and tender.
Tests that may be done include:
Antihistone antibody
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) panel
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) panel
Complete blood count (CBC)
with differential
Comprehensive chemistry panel
Urinalysis
chest x-ray
may show signs of pleuritis or pericarditis (inflammation around the lining of the lung or heart). An
ECG
may show that the heart is affected.
Treatment
Most of the time, symptoms go away within weeks after stopping the medicine that caused the condition.
Treatment may include:
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to treat arthritis and pleurisy
Corticosteroid creams to treat skin rashes
Antimalarial drugs (hydroxychloroquine) to treat skin and arthritis symptoms
If the condition is affecting your heart, kidney, or nervous system, you may be prescribed high doses of corticosteroids (prednisone, methylprednisolone) and immune system suppressants (azathioprine or cyclophosphamide). This is rare.
When the disease is active, you should wear protective clothing and sunglasses to guard against too much sun.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most of the time, drug-induced lupus erythematosus is not as severe as SLE. The symptoms often go away within a few days to weeks after stopping the medicine you were taking. Rarely, kidney inflammation (nephritis) can develop with drug-induced lupus caused by TNF inhibitors or with ANCA vasculitis due to hydralazine or levamisole. Nephritis may require treatment with prednisone and immunosuppressive medicines.
Avoid taking the drug that caused the reaction in future. Symptoms are likely to return if you do so.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Infection
Thrombocytopenic
purpura -- bleeding near the skin surface, resulting from a low number of platelets in the blood
Hemolytic anemia
Myocarditis
Pericarditis
Nephritis
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You develop new symptoms when taking any of the medicines listed above.
Your symptoms do not get better after you stop taking the medicine that caused the condition.
Prevention
Watch for signs of a reaction if you are taking any of the drugs that can cause this problem.
Alternative Names
Lupus - drug induced
Images
Lupus, discoid  - view of lesions on the chest
Antibodies
References
Benfaremo D, Manfredi L, Luchetti MM, Gabrielli A. Musculoskeletal and rheumatic diseases induced by immune checkpoint inhibitors: a review of the literature.
Curr Drug Saf
. 2018;13(3):150-164. PMID: 29745339
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29745339/
.
Radhakrishnan J, Perazella MA. Drug-induced glomerular disease: attention required.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
. 2015;10(7):1287-1290. PMID: 25876771
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25876771/
.
Richardson B. Drug-induced lupus. In: Hochberg MC, Gravallese EM, Smolen JS, van der Heijde D, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.
Rheumatology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 140.
Rubin RL. Drug-induced lupus.
Expert Opin Drug Saf
. 2015;14(3):361-378. PMID: 25554102
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25554102/
.
Vaglio A, Grayson PC, Fenaroli P, et al. Drug-induced lupus: traditional and new concepts.
Autoimmun Rev
. 2018;17(9):912-918. PMID: 30005854
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30005854/
.
Review Date 4/30/2023
Updated by: Neil J. Gonter, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, and private practice specializing in Rheumatology at Rheumatology Associates of North Jersey, Teaneck, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Lupus