Hemangioma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hemangioma
Hemangioma
A hemangioma is an abnormal  buildup of blood vessels in the skin or internal organs.
Causes
About one third of hemangiomas are present at birth. The rest appear in the first several months of life.
The hemangioma may be:
In the top skin layers (
capillary hemangioma
)
Deeper in the skin (cavernous hemangioma)
A mixture of both layers of skin
In an internal organ and not visible
Symptoms
Symptoms of a hemangioma are:
A red to reddish-purple, raised growth on the skin
A massive, raised, bluish lump with visible blood vessels
Most hemangiomas are on the head, neck, or extremities.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will do a physical exam to diagnose a hemangioma. If the buildup of blood vessels is deep inside the body, a
CT
or
MRI
scan may be needed.
A hemangioma may occur with other rare conditions. Other tests to check for related problems may be done.
Treatment
The majority of small or uncomplicated hemangiomas may not need treatment. They often go away on their own and the appearance of the skin returns to normal. Sometimes, a laser may be used to remove the small blood vessels.
Taking beta-blocker medicines may also help reduce the size of a hemangioma.
Cavernous hemangiomas that involve the eyelid and block vision can be treated with lasers or steroid injections to shrink them. This allows vision to develop normally. Large cavernous hemangiomas or mixed hemangiomas may be treated with steroids, taken by mouth or injected into the hemangioma.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Small superficial hemangiomas will often disappear on their own. About one half  go away by age 5, and almost all disappear by age 7.
Possible Complications
These complications can occur from a hemangioma:
Bleeding (especially if the hemangioma is injured)
Problems with breathing
and eating
Psychological problems, from skin appearance
Secondary infections
and sores
Visible changes in the skin
Vision problems
When to Contact a Medical Professional
All birthmarks, including hemangiomas, should be evaluated by your provider during a regular exam.
Hemangiomas of the eyelid that may cause problems with vision must be treated soon after birth. Hemangiomas that interfere with eating or breathing also need to be treated early.
Contact your provider if a hemangioma is bleeding or develops a sore.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent hemangiomas.
Alternative Names
Infantile hemangioma; Cavernous hemangioma; Strawberry nevus; Birthmark - hemangioma
Images
Hemangioma - angiogram
Hemangioma excision  - series
Hemangioma on the face (nose)
Hemangioma excision
References
Dinulos JGH. Vascular tumors and malformations. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 23.
Martin KL. Vascular anomalies. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 691.
Patterson JW. Vascular tumors. In: Patterson JW, ed.
Weedon's Skin Pathology
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Limited; 2021:chap 39.
Review Date 10/14/2024
Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Benign Tumors
Birthmarks
Vascular Diseases