LDL test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
LDL test
LDL test
The low-density lipoprotein (LDL) test is a blood test to measure the amount of LDL cholesterol in your blood. LDL is a type of fat (lipid) in your blood.
LDL is called "bad" cholesterol because it can
build up and form fatty deposits
(plaques) in the walls of your arteries.
The LDL test is often done as part of a
lipid profile
, which measures other fats in your blood:
Total cholesterol
HDL cholesterol
Triglycerides
Very low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (
VLDL cholesterol
)
How the Test is Performed
A blood sample is needed. Most of the time,
blood is drawn from a vein
located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.
How to Prepare for the Test
You should not eat for 9 to 12 hours before the test.
Alcohol and some medicines can interfere with blood test results.
Make sure your health care provider knows what medicines you take, including over-the-counter medicines and supplements.
Your provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test.
Do not stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.
How the Test will Feel
You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. You may also feel some throbbing at the site after the blood is drawn.
Why the Test is Performed
LDL cholesterol is usually measured together with other blood fats. Often it is done to help determine your risk of developing heart disease.
High LDL increases your risk for:
Heart disease
Peripheral artery disease
Heart attack
Stroke
Normal Results
You want your LDL to be low. In general, lower is better.
Your LDL is always considered to be too high if it is 190 mg/dL (4.92 mmol/L) or higher.
General targets for children are less than 110 mg/dL (2.85 mmol/L) (lower numbers are better).
Levels from 70 to 189 mg/dL (1.81 to 4.90 mmol/L) are most often considered too high if:
You have diabetes and are between ages 40 to 75
You have diabetes and a high risk of heart disease
You have a medium or high risk of heart disease
You have heart disease, history of a stroke, or poor circulation to your legs
In these circumstances, your provider will often recommend medicine to lower your LDL cholesterol level.
Health care providers have traditionally set a target level for your LDL cholesterol if you are being treated with medicines to lower your cholesterol.
Some newer guidelines now suggest that providers no longer need to target a specific number for your LDL cholesterol. Higher strength medicines are used for the highest risk patients.
However, some guidelines still recommend using specific targets, including lowering LDL to less than 55 mg/dL in very high-risk patients.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
A higher-than-normal LDL may be due to:
Eating a diet high in saturated fats
Lack of physical activity
Being overweight
or
having obesity
Diabetes
Metabolic syndrome
Certain medicines
Underactive thyroid gland (
hypothyroid
)
Disorder passed down through families in which there are high amounts of cholesterol and triglycerides in the blood (
familial combined hyperlipidemia
)
Kidney or liver disease
If your LDL level is high, your provider may recommend changes in your
lifestyle
such as:
Eating a healthy diet
Losing weight (if you are overweight or have obesity)
Getting regular exercise
Quitting smoking
Avoiding alcohol
You may also need
medicine to lower your LDL levels
if you have diabetes or are at risk of heart disease. While taking medicines to lower your LDL level, you should continue the lifestyle changes.
Risks
There is little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting
or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma
(blood buildup under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Considerations
Certain medicines, pregnancy, infection, and some medical conditions can affect test results.
Alternative Names
LDL cholesterol; Low-density lipoprotein LDL cholesterol levels
Images
Cholesterol
Cholesterol producers
Blood test
References
Bredefeld CL, Lau R, Hussain MM. Lipids and dyslipoproteinemia. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 18.
Genest J, Mora S, Libby P. Lipoprotein disorders and cardiovascular disease. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli, GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 27.
Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the management of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on clinical practice guidelines.
Circulation
. 2019;139(25):e1082-e1143. PMID: 30586774
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30586774/
.
Mora S, Libby P, Ridker PM. Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli, GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 25.
Robinson JG. Disorders of lipid metabolism. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 190.
Review Date 7/25/2024
Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cholesterol
LDL: The "Bad" Cholesterol