Contac overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Contac overdose
Contac overdose
Contac is the brand name for a cough, cold, and allergy medicine. It contains several ingredients, including members of the class of medicines known as sympathomimetics, which can have effects similar to adrenaline. Contac overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
These ingredients in Contac can be harmful in large amounts:
Acetaminophen
(Tylenol)
Chlorpheniramine
Phenylpropanolamine
Dextromethorphan hydrobromide
Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride
Note:
Not all of these ingredients are found in every form of Contac.
Where Found
Besides being in Contac, these ingredients are also found in some over-the-counter herbal products advertised to help with weight loss and athletic performance.
Symptoms
Symptoms of a Contac overdose include:
Agitation
Blurred vision
Convulsions
(seizures)
Depression
Delirium
(acute confusion)
Disorientation, nervousness,
hallucinations
Drowsiness
Enlarged (dilated) pupils
Fever
Inability to urinate or completely empty the bladder
Increased blood pressure
Irregular heartbeat
Muscle pain and spasms,
tremor
, unsteadiness
Nausea and vomiting
Rapid heartbeat
Yellow eyes due to
jaundice
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
The person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
Your health care provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain for neurologic symptoms
Electrocardiogram
(ECG) or heart tracing
Treatment may include:
Activated charcoal
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Medicine to treat symptoms
Laxative
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Outlook (Prognosis)
This type of overdose tends to be mild. However, if the person swallowed enough of the product, serious complications (such as liver damage) can occur. This is from the acetaminophen in the product. How well a  person does depends on how much was taken and how soon they receive treatment. Serious heart rhythm disturbances and death can occur.
References
Aronson JK. Ephedra, ephedrine, and pseudoephedrine. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:65-75.
Ganetsky M. Acetaminophen. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 138.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cold and Cough Medicines