Opisthotonos: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Opisthotonos
Opisthotonos
Opisthotonos is a condition in which a person holds their body in an abnormal position. The person is usually rigid and arches their back, with their head thrown backward. If a person with opisthotonos lies on their back, only the back of their head and heels touch the surface they are on.
Considerations
Opisthotonos is much more common in infants and children than in adults. It is also more extreme in infants and children because of their less mature nervous systems.
Causes
Opisthotonos may occur in infants with
meningitis
. This is an infection of the meninges, the membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord. Viruses,
malaria
, and syphilis are infections associated with opisthotonos. It may also occur as a sign of reduced brain function or injury to the nervous system.
Other causes may include:
Arnold-Chiari syndrome, a problem with the structure of the brain
Brain tumor
Cerebral palsy
Gaucher disease
, which causes a buildup of fatty tissue in certain organs
Growth hormone deficiency
(occasionally)
Poisoning including strychnine, some street drugs, and some medicines
Metabolic disorders that run in families, such as glutaric aciduria and organic acidemias,
Krabbe disease
,
maple syrup urine disease
, and others
Seizures
Severe
electrolyte
imbalance
Traumatic brain injury
Stiff-person syndrome (a condition that makes a person rigid and have spasms)
Bleeding in the brain
Tetanus
Some antipsychotic medicines can cause a side effect called
acute
dystonic reaction. Opisthotonos may be part of this reaction.
In rare cases, infants born to women who drink large amounts of alcohol during pregnancy may have opisthotonos due to alcohol withdrawal.
Home Care
A person who develops opisthotonos will need to be checked at a hospital and may need to be admitted to a hospital for care.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Go to the emergency room or call 911 or the local emergency number if symptoms of opisthotonos occur. Typically, opisthotonos is a symptom of other conditions that are serious enough for a person to seek medical attention.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
This condition will be evaluated in a hospital, and emergency measures may be taken.
Your health care provider will perform a
physical exam
and ask about symptoms to look for the cause of opisthotonos
Questions may include:
When did the symptoms start?
Is the body positioning always the same?
What other symptoms came before or with the
abnormal positioning
(such as fever, stiff neck, or headache)?
Is there any recent history of illness?
The physical exam will include a complete checkup of the nervous system.
Tests may include:
Blood and urine tests
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) culture
and
cell counts
CT scan of the head
Electrolyte
analysis
Lumbar puncture
(spinal tap)
MRI of the brain
Treatment will depend on the cause. For example, if meningitis is the cause, medicines may be given.
Alternative Names
Back arching; Abnormal posturing - opisthotonos; Decerebrate posture - opisthotonos
Images
Meninges of the brain
References
Berger JR, Price R. Stupor and coma. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 5.
Birch TB, Bleck TP. Tetanus (Clostridium tetani). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 244.
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al. Defects in metabolism of amino acids. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 105.
Review Date 4/16/2025
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Neurologic Diseases