High blood pressure in infants: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
High blood pressure in infants
High blood pressure in infants
High blood pressure (hypertension) is an increase in the force of blood against the arteries in the body. This article focuses on high blood pressure in infants.
Causes
Blood pressure measures how hard the heart is working, and how healthy the arteries are. There are two numbers in each blood pressure measurement:
The first (top) number is the systolic blood pressure, which measures the force of blood released when the heart beats.
The second (bottom) number is the diastolic pressure, which measures the pressure in the arteries when the heart is at rest.
Blood pressure measurements are written this way: 120/80. One or both of these numbers can be too high.
Several factors affect blood pressure, including:
Hormones
The health of the heart and blood vessels
The health of the kidneys
High blood pressure in infants may be due to kidney or heart disease that is present at birth (congenital). Common examples include:
Coarctation of the aorta
(narrowing of the large blood vessel of the heart called the aorta)
Patent ductus arteriosus
(blood vessel between the aorta and pulmonary artery that should close after birth, but remains open)
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
(lung condition that affects newborn babies who were either put on a breathing machine after birth or were born very early)
Kidney disease
Renal artery stenosis (narrowing of the major blood vessel of the kidney)
In newborn babies, high blood pressure is often caused by a blood clot in a kidney blood vessel, a complication of having an
umbilical artery catheter
.
Other causes of high blood pressure in infants may include:
Certain medicines
Exposure to illegal drugs such as cocaine
Certain tumors
Inherited conditions (problems that run in families)
Thyroid problems
Blood pressure rises as the baby grows. The average blood pressure in a newborn is 64/41. The average blood pressure in a child 1 month through 2 years old is 95/58. It is normal for these numbers to vary.
Symptoms
Most babies with high blood pressure will not have symptoms. Instead, symptoms may be related to the condition causing the high blood pressure. These symptoms may include:
Bluish skin
(cyanosis)
Failure to grow and gain weight
Frequent urinary tract infections
Pale skin
(pallor)
Rapid breathing
Symptoms that may appear if the baby has very high blood pressure include:
Irritability
Seizures
Trouble breathing
Vomiting
Exams and Tests
In most cases, the only sign of high blood pressure is the blood pressure measurement itself.
Signs of very high blood pressure include:
Heart failure
Kidney failure
Rapid pulse
Blood pressure in infants is measured with an automatic device.
If
coarctation of the aorta
is the cause, there may be decreased pulses or blood pressure in the legs. A click may be heard if a
bicuspid aortic valve
occurs with the coarctation.
Other tests in infants with high blood pressure will try to find the cause of the problem. Such tests may include:
Laboratory tests, including blood and urine tests
X-rays of the chest or abdomen
Ultrasounds, including an ultrasound of the working heart (
echocardiogram
) and of the kidneys
MRI
of the blood vessels
A special type of x-ray that uses a dye to look at blood vessels (angiography)
Treatment
The treatment depends on the cause of high blood pressure in the infant. Treatment can include:
Dialysis
to treat kidney failure
Medicines to lower blood pressure or help the heart pump better
Surgery (including transplantation surgery or repair of the coarctation)
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well the baby does depends on the cause of high blood pressure and other factors such as:
Other health problems in the baby
Whether damage (such as kidney damage) has occurred as a result of the high blood pressure
Possible Complications
Untreated, high blood pressure may lead to:
Heart or kidney failure
Organ damage
Seizures
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if your baby:
Fails to grow and gain weight
Has bluish skin
Has frequent urinary tract infections
Seems irritable
Tires easily
Take your baby to the emergency department if your baby:
Has seizures
Is not responding
Is vomiting constantly
Prevention
Some causes of high blood pressure run in families. Talk to your provider before you get pregnant if either parent has a family history of:
Congenital heart disease
High blood pressure
Kidney disease
Also talk to your provider before becoming pregnant if you take medicine for a health problem. Exposure to certain medicines in the womb may increase your baby's risk for developing problems that can lead to high blood pressure.
Alternative Names
Hypertension - infants
Images
Umbilical catheter
Coarctation of the aorta
References
Flynn JT Jr. Systemic hypertension. In: Gleason CA, Sawyer T, eds.
Avery's Diseases of the Newborn
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 81.
Macumber IR, Flynn JT. Systemic hypertension. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 494.
Sinha MD, Reid C. Systemic hypertension. In: Wernovsky G, Anderson RH, Kumar K, et al, eds.
Anderson's Pediatric Cardiology
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 60.
Review Date 4/1/2024
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
High Blood Pressure