Hypervitaminosis D: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hypervitaminosis D
Hypervitaminosis D
Hypervitaminosis D is a condition that occurs after taking very high doses of
vitamin D
.
Causes
The cause is excess intake of vitamin D. The doses need to be very high, far above what most health care providers normally prescribe.
There has been a lot of confusion about vitamin D supplementation. The recommended daily allowance (RDA) for vitamin D is between 400 and 800 IU/day, according to age and pregnancy status. Higher doses may be needed for some people, such as those with vitamin D deficiency, hypoparathyroidism, and other conditions. However, most people do not need more than 2,000 IU of vitamin D a day.
For most people, vitamin D toxicity only occurs with vitamin D doses above 10,000 IU per day.
Symptoms
An excess of vitamin D can cause an abnormally high level of calcium in the blood (
hypercalcemia
). This can severely damage the kidneys, soft tissues, and bones over time.
The symptoms include:
Constipation
Decreased appetite
(anorexia)
Dehydration
Fatigue
and confusion
Frequent urination
Irritability
Muscle weakness
Vomiting
Excessive thirst (
polydipsia
)
High blood pressure
Passing large amounts of urine (
polyuria
)
Exams and Tests
Your provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms.
Tests that may be ordered include:
Calcium level in the blood
Calcium level in the urine
25-hydroxy vitamin D level
1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D level
Serum phosphorus level
X-ray of the bone
Treatment
Your provider will likely tell you to stop taking vitamin D. In severe cases, other treatment may be needed.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Recovery is expected, but permanent kidney damage can occur.
Possible Complications
Health problems that can result from taking too much vitamin D over a long time include:
Dehydration
Hypercalcemia
Kidney damage
Kidney stones
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You or your child shows symptoms of hypervitaminosis D and has been taking more vitamin D than the RDA
You or your child shows symptoms and has been taking a prescription or over-the-counter form of vitamin D
Prevention
To prevent this condition, pay careful attention to the correct vitamin D dose. Use vitamin D supplements from reliable licensed sources.
Many combination vitamin supplements contain vitamin D, so check the labels of all the supplements you are taking for vitamin D content.
Alternative Names
Vitamin D toxicity
References
Bringhurst FR, Demay MB, Kronenberg HM. Hormones and disorders of mineral metabolism. In: Melmed S, Auchus, RJ, Goldfine AB, Koenig RJ, Rosen CJ, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 29.
Greenbaum LA. Vitamin D deficiency (rickets) and excess. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 64.
National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements website. Vitamin D fact sheet for health professionals.
ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional/
. Updated September 18, 2023. Accessed January 19, 2024.
Review Date 10/29/2023
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Vitamin D