Amylase - urine: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Amylase - urine
Amylase - urine
This is a test that measures the amount of amylase in urine. Amylase is an
enzyme
that helps digest carbohydrates. It is produced mainly in the pancreas and the glands that make saliva.
Amylase may also be
measured with a blood test
.
How the Test is Performed
A urine sample is needed. The test may be performed using:
Clean-catch urine test
24-hour urine collection
How to Prepare for the Test
Many medicines can interfere with test results.
Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test.
Do not stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.
How the Test will Feel
The test involves only normal urination. There is no discomfort.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is sometimes done to help diagnose pancreatitis and other diseases that affect the pancreas.
Normal Results
The normal range is 2.6 to 21.2 international units per hour (IU/h).
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
The example above shows the common measurement range  for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens.
What Abnormal Results Mean
An increased amount of amylase in the urine is called amylasuria. Increased urine amylase levels may be a sign of:
Acute pancreatitis
Alcohol consumption
Cancer of the pancreas
, ovaries, or lungs
Cholecystitis
Ectopic or ruptured
tubal pregnancy
Gallbladder disease
Infection of the salivary glands (called sialoadenitis, may be caused by bacteria,
mumps
or a blockage)
Intestinal obstruction
Pancreatic duct obstruction
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Perforated ulcer
Decreased amylase levels may be due to:
Damage to the pancreas
Kidney disease
Macroamylasemia
Images
Female urinary tract
Male urinary tract
Amylase urine test
References
Siddiqi HA, Rabinowitz S, Axiotis CA. Laboratory diagnosis of gastrointestinal and pancreatic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.
24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 23.
Vege SS. Acute pancreatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.
11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 58.
Review Date 8/20/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Intestinal Obstruction
Kidney Tests
Pancreatic Cancer
Pancreatic Diseases
Pancreatitis