Fontanelles - bulging: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Fontanelles - bulging
Fontanelles - bulging
A bulging fontanelle is an outward curving of an infant's soft spot (fontanelle).
Considerations
The skull is made up of many bones. There are 8 bones in the skull itself and 14 bones in the face area. They join together to form a solid, bony cavity that protects and supports the brain. The areas where the bones join together are called the sutures.
The bones are not joined together firmly at birth. This allows the head to change shape to help it pass through the birth canal. The sutures get minerals added to them over time and harden, firmly joining the skull bones together.
In an infant, the space where 2 sutures join forms a membrane-covered "soft spot" called a fontanelle (fontanel). The fontanelles allow for growth of the brain and skull during an infant's first year.
There are normally several fontanelles on a newborn's skull. They are located mainly at the top, back, and sides of the head. Like the sutures, fontanelles harden over time and become closed, solid bony areas.
The fontanelle in the back of the head (posterior fontanelle) most often closes by age 1 to 2 months.
The fontanelle at the top of the head (
anterior
fontanelle) most often closes within 7 to 19 months.
The fontanelles should feel firm and very slightly curved inward to the touch. A tense or bulging fontanelle occurs when fluid builds up in the brain or the brain swells, causing increased pressure inside the skull.
When the infant is crying, lying down, or vomiting, the fontanelles may look like they are bulging. However, they should return to normal when the infant is in a calm, head-up position.
Causes
Reasons a child may have bulging fontanelles include:
Encephalitis
. Swelling (inflammation) of the brain, most often due to infections.
Hydrocephalus
. A buildup of fluid inside the skull.
Increased intracranial pressure.
Meningitis
. Infection of the membranes covering the brain.
Home Care
If the fontanelle returns to normal appearance when the child is calm and head-up, it is not a truly bulging fontanelle.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Immediate, emergency care is needed for any infant who has a truly bulging fontanelle, especially if it occurs along with fever or excess drowsiness.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The health care provider will perform a
physical exam
and ask questions about the child's medical history, such as:
Does the "soft spot" return to normal appearance when the infant is calm or head-up?
Does it bulge all the time or does it come and go?
When did you first notice this?
Which fontanelles bulge (top of the head, back of the head, or other)?
Are all the fontanelles bulging?
What other symptoms are present (such as
fever
,
irritability
, or
lethargy
)?
Diagnostic tests that may be done are:
CT scan of the head
MRI scan of the head
Spinal tap (
lumbar puncture
)
Alternative Names
Soft spot - bulging; Bulging fontanelles
Images
Skull of a newborn
Bulging fontanelles
References
Parga-Belinkie JJ. The newborn infant. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 115.
Rosenberg GA. Brain edema and disorders of cerebrospinal fluid circulation. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 88.
Schnapp BH, Jewell C. Central nervous system infections. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 95.
Review Date 1/17/2025
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Brain Diseases
Hydrocephalus
Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems