Propyl alcohol: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Propyl alcohol
Propyl alcohol
Propyl alcohol is a clear liquid commonly used as a germ killer (antiseptic). This article discusses poisoning from accidentally or intentionally swallowing propyl alcohol. It is the second most commonly ingested alcohol after ethanol (drinking alcohol).
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Isopropyl alcohol
Where Found
Propyl alcohol is found in any of the following:
Antifreeze
Hand sanitizers
Rubbing alcohol
Alcohol swabs
Skin and hair products
Nail polish remover
This list may not be all inclusive.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Abdominal pain
Lack of responsiveness (
coma
)
Decreased or absent reflexes
Difficulty breathing
Dizziness
Headache
Tiredness (lethargy)
Low blood pressure (a sign of serious poisoning with increased risk of death)
Low urine output
Nausea and vomiting
Slowed or labored breathing
Slurred speech
Decreased level of alertness and confusion (stupor)
Uncoordinated movements
Vomiting blood
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional.
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength if known)
When it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
For more information about America's Poison Centers, go to
poisoncenters.org
.
If you go to the emergency room, take the container with you, if possible.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and ventilator (breathing machine)
Blood and urine tests including a blood isopropyl alcohol level
Chest x-ray
CT scan
ECG (
electrocardiogram
, or heart tracing)
Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV)
Laxative
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
Propyl alcohol poisoning is rarely deadly. Long-term effects are possible, including kidney failure, which could require dialysis (kidney machine). Dialysis may also be needed in serious cases of acute poisoning.
Alternative Names
N-propyl alcohol; 1-propanol
References
Bluth MH, Pincus MR, Abraham NZ. Toxicology and therapeutic drug monitoring. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 24.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Nelson ME. Toxic alcohols. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 136.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.