Lupus nephritis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Lupus nephritis
Lupus nephritis
Lupus nephritis, which is a kidney disorder, is a complication of
systemic lupus erythematosus
.
Causes
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE, or lupus) is an
autoimmune disease
. This means there is a problem with the body's immune system.
Normally, the immune system helps protect the body from infection or harmful substances. But in people with an autoimmune disease, the immune system cannot tell the difference between harmful substances and healthy ones. As a result, the immune system attacks otherwise healthy cells and tissues.
SLE may damage different parts of the kidney. This can lead to disorders such as:
Interstitial nephritis
Nephrotic syndrome
Membranous glomerulonephritis
Kidney failure
Symptoms
Symptoms of lupus nephritis include:
Blood in the urine
Foamy appearance to urine
Swelling
(edema) of any area of the body
High blood pressure
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. Abnormal sounds may be heard when the provider listens to your heart and lungs.
Tests that may be done include:
ANA
titer
BUN
and
creatinine
Complement
levels
Urinalysis
Urine protein
Kidney biopsy
, to determine appropriate treatment
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to improve kidney function and to delay kidney failure.
Medicines may include drugs that suppress the immune system, such as corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, or azathioprine.
You may need
dialysis
to control symptoms of kidney failure, sometimes for only a while. A kidney transplant may be recommended. People with active lupus should not have a transplant because the condition can occur in the transplanted kidney.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well you do depends on the specific form of lupus nephritis. You may have flare-ups, and then times when you do not have any symptoms.
Some people with this condition develop long-term (chronic) kidney failure.
Although lupus nephritis may return in a transplanted kidney, it rarely leads to end-stage kidney disease.
Possible Complications
Complications that may result from lupus nephritis include:
Acute renal failure
Chronic renal failure
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have
blood in your urine
or
swelling
of your body.
If you have lupus nephritis, contact your provider if you notice
decreased urine output
.
Prevention
Treating lupus may help prevent or delay onset of lupus nephritis.
Alternative Names
Nephritis - lupus; Lupus glomerular disease
Images
Kidney anatomy
References
Hahn BH, McMahon M, Wilkinson A, et al. American College of Rheumatology guidelines for screening, case definition, treatment and management of lupus nephritis.
Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
. 2012;64(6):797-808. PMCID: 3437757
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3437757/
.
Malvar A, Alberton V, Rovin BH. Lupus nephritis. In: Johnson RJ, Floege J, Tonelli M, eds.
Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 27.
Radhakrishnan J, Stokes MB. Glomerular disorders and nephrotic syndromes. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 107.
Review Date 8/28/2023
Updated by: Walead Latif, MD, Nephrologist and Clinical Associate Professor, Rutgers Medical School, Newark, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Lupus