Scleritis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Scleritis
Scleritis
The sclera is the white outer wall of the eye. Scleritis is present when this area becomes swollen or inflamed.
Causes
Scleritis is often linked to
autoimmune diseases
. These diseases occur when the body's immune system attacks and destroys healthy body tissue by mistake.
Rheumatoid arthritis
and
systemic lupus erythematosus
are examples of autoimmune diseases that can be associated with scleritis. Sometimes the cause is unknown.
Scleritis occurs most often in people between the ages of 30 and 60. It is rare in children.
Symptoms
Symptoms of scleritis include:
Blurred vision
Eye pain
and tenderness -- severe
Red patches on the normally white part of the eye
Sensitivity to light
-- can be painful
Tearing of the eye
A rare form of this disease causes no eye pain or redness.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform the following tests:
Eye exam
Physical exam and blood tests to look for conditions that may be causing the problem
It is important for your provider to determine if your symptoms are due to scleritis. The same symptoms can also be a less severe form of inflammation, such as
episcleritis
.
Treatment
Treatments for scleritis may include:
Corticosteroid eye drops to help reduce the inflammation
Corticosteroid pills
Newer, nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in some cases
Certain anticancer drugs (immune-suppressants) to help reduce the inflammation in severe cases
If scleritis is caused by an underlying disease, treatment of that disease may be needed.
Outlook (Prognosis)
In most cases, scleritis goes away with treatment. But it may come back.
If there is a disorder causing scleritis, it may be serious. However, it may not be discovered the first time you have the problem. The outcome will depend on the specific underlying disorder.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Return of scleritis
Side effects of long-term corticosteroid therapy
Perforation of the eyeball, leading to vision loss if the condition is left untreated
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider or ophthalmologist if you have symptoms of scleritis.
Prevention
Most cases cannot be prevented.
People with autoimmune diseases, may need to have regular check-ups with an ophthalmologist familiar with the condition.
Alternative Names
Inflammation - sclera
Images
Eye
References
Barry RJ, Denniston AK, Rhodes B, et al. Rheumatic disease. In: Sadda SVR, Sarraf D, Freund KB, et al, eds.
Ryan's Retina
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 81.
Cioffi GA, Liebmann JM. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 391.
Patel SS, Zaguia F, Goldstein DA. Episcleritis and scleritis. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.
Ophthalmology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 4.11.
Review Date 7/9/2024
Updated by: Audrey Tai, DO, MS, Athena Eye Care, Mission Viejo, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Eye Diseases
Lupus
Rheumatoid Arthritis