Tooth - abnormal shape: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Tooth - abnormal shape
Tooth - abnormal shape
An abnormally shaped tooth is any tooth that deviates from its regular shape.
Considerations
The appearance of normal teeth varies, especially the molars. Abnormally-shaped teeth can result from many different conditions. Specific diseases can affect tooth shape, tooth color, and when they grow in. Some diseases can lead to absence of teeth.
Causes
Some diseases that can cause abnormal tooth shape and growth are:
Congenital syphilis
Cerebral palsy
Ectodermal dysplasia
, anhidrotic
Incontinentia pigmenti achromians
Cleidocranial dysostosis
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Ellis-van Creveld syndrome
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Talk to a dentist or health care provider if the shape of your child's teeth appears to be abnormal.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The dentist will examine the mouth and teeth. You will be asked questions about your child's medical history and symptoms, such as:
Does your child have any medical conditions that may cause abnormal tooth shape?
At what age did the teeth appear?
In what order did the teeth appear?
Does your child have other tooth problems (color, spacing)?
What other symptoms are also present?
Braces, fillings (bonding), and dental restorations such as crowns, veneers, or bridges may be needed to correct the abnormal shape and improve the appearance and spacing of the teeth.
Dental x-rays
and other diagnostic tests may be done.
Alternative Names
Hutchinson incisors; Abnormal tooth shape; Peg teeth; Mulberry teeth; Conical teeth; Connate teeth; Conjoined teeth; Microdontia; Macrodontia; Mulberry molars
References
Dhar V. Development and developmental anomalies of the teeth. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.
22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 353.
Moore KL, Persuad TVN, Torchia MG. Integumentary system. In: Moore KL, Persuad TVN, Torchia MG, eds.
The Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology.
11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 19.
Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Abnormalities of teeth. In: Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC, eds.
Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology.
5th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2024:chap 2.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Michael Kapner, DDS, General Dentistry, Norwalk Medical Center, Norwalk CT. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Tooth Disorders