Ectopic Cushing syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Ectopic Cushing syndrome
Ectopic Cushing syndrome
Ectopic Cushing syndrome is a form of
Cushing syndrome
in which a tumor outside the pituitary gland produces a hormone called adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).
Causes
Cushing syndrome is a disorder that occurs when your body has a higher than normal level of the hormone cortisol. This hormone is made in the
adrenal glands
. Too much cortisol can be due to various problems. One of the causes is if there is too much of the hormone ACTH in the blood. ACTH is usually made by the pituitary in small amounts and then signals the adrenal glands to produce cortisol. Sometimes other cells outside the pituitary can make large amounts of ACTH. This is called ectopic Cushing syndrome. Ectopic means that something is occurring in an abnormal place in the body.
Ectopic Cushing syndrome is caused by
tumors
that release ACTH. Tumors that can, in rare cases, release ACTH include:
Benign carcinoid tumors of the lung
Islet cell tumors
of the pancreas
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid
Small cell tumors of the lung
Tumors of the thymus gland
Symptoms
Ectopic Cushing syndrome can cause a lot of different symptoms. Some people have many symptoms while others have only a few. Most people with any type of Cushing syndrome have:
Round, red, and full face (
moon face
)
Slow growth rate in children
Weight gain with fat accumulation on the trunk, but fat loss from the arms, legs, and buttocks (central obesity)
Skin changes that are often seen:
Skin infections
Thick, purple stretch marks (1/2 inch or 1 centimeter or more wide) called
striae
on the skin of the abdomen, thighs, upper arms, and breasts
Thin skin with easy bruising
Muscle and bone changes include:
Backache, which occurs with routine activities
Bone pain or tenderness
Collection of fat between the shoulders and above the collar bone
Rib and spine fractures caused by
thinning of the bones
Weak muscles, especially of the hips and shoulders
Body-wide (systemic) problems may include:
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
High blood pressure
High cholesterol and triglycerides
Women may have:
Excess hair growth on the face, neck, chest, abdomen, and thighs
Periods that become irregular or stop
Men may have:
Decreased or no desire for sex
Impotence
Other symptoms that may occur include:
Mental changes, such as
depression
, anxiety, or changes in behavior
Fatigue
Headache
Increased
thirst
and
urination
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms.
Tests that may be done include:
24-hour urine sample to measure
cortisol
and
creatinine
levels
Blood tests to check ACTH,
cortisol
, and
potassium
levels (the potassium level is often very low in ectopic Cushing syndrome)
Dexamethasone suppression test
(both high and low dose)
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling (a special test that measures ACTH from veins near the brain and in the chest)
Fasting glucose
MRI
and high resolution
CT scans
to find the tumor (sometimes nuclear medicine scans may be needed)
Treatment
The best treatment for ectopic Cushing syndrome is surgery to remove the tumor that is producing too much ACTH. Surgery is usually possible when the tumor is noncancerous (
benign
).
In some cases, the tumor is cancerous and spreads to other areas of the body before your provider can discover the problem with cortisol production. Surgery may not be possible in these cases. But your provider may prescribe medicines to block cortisol production.
Sometimes removal of both adrenal glands is needed if the tumor cannot be found and medicines do not fully block cortisol production.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Surgery to remove the tumor may lead to full recovery. But there is a chance that the tumor will come back.
Possible Complications
The tumor may spread or return after surgery. A high cortisol level may continue.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you develop symptoms of Cushing syndrome.
Prevention
Prompt treatment of tumors may reduce the risk in some cases. Many cases are not preventable.
Alternative Names
Cushing syndrome - ectopic; Ectopic ACTH syndrome; Ectopic Cushing's syndrome
Images
Endocrine glands
References
Newell-Price JDC, Auchus RJ. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Koenig RJ, Rosen CJ, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 15.
Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al. Treatment of Cushing's syndrome: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab
. 2015;100(8):2807-2831. PMID 26222757
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26222757/
.
Review Date 5/12/2023
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cushing's Syndrome