Meatal stenosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Meatal stenosis
Meatal stenosis
Meatal stenosis is a narrowing of the opening of the urethra, the tube through which urine leaves the body.
Causes
Meatal stenosis can affect both males and females. It is more common in males.
In males, it is often caused by swelling and irritation (inflammation). In most cases, this problem occurs in newborns after
circumcision
. Abnormal scar tissue can grow across the opening of the urethra, causing it to narrow. The problem may not be detected until the child is toilet trained.
In adult men, the condition can result from surgery on the urethra, ongoing use of an
indwelling catheter
, or a procedure to treat an
enlarged prostate gland
(BPH).
In females, this condition is most often present at birth (congenital). Less commonly, meatal stenosis may also affect adult women.
Risks include:
Having many endoscopic procedures (
cystoscopy
)
Severe, long-term
atrophic vaginitis
Symptoms
Symptoms include:
Abnormal strength and direction of urine stream
Bed wetting
Bleeding (
hematuria
) at end of urination
Discomfort with urination
or straining with urination
Incontinence
(day or night)
Visible narrowing of the urethral opening in boys
Exams and Tests
In men and boys, a history and physical exam are enough to make the diagnosis.
In girls, a
voiding cystourethrogram
may be done. The narrowing may also be found during a physical exam or when a health care provider tries to place a
Foley catheter
.
Other tests may include:
Kidney and bladder
ultrasound
Urine analysis
Urine culture
Treatment
In females, meatal stenosis is most often treated in the provider's office. This is done using local anesthesia to numb the area. Then the opening of the urethra is widened (dilated) with special instruments.
In boys, a minor outpatient surgery called meatoplasty is the treatment of choice. Dilation of the meatus may also be appropriate in some cases.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most people will urinate normally after treatment.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Abnormal urine stream
Blood in the urine
Frequent urination
Painful urination
Urinary incontinence
Urinary tract infections
Damage to bladder or kidney function in severe cases
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if your child has symptoms of this disorder.
Prevention
If your baby boy has recently been circumcised, try to keep the diaper clean and dry. Avoid exposing the newly circumcised penis to any irritants. They may cause inflammation and narrowing of the opening.
Alternative Names
Urethral meatal stenosis
Images
Female urinary tract
Male urinary tract
Meatal stenosis
References
Chaudhry R, Cannon GM. Urologic disorders. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, Garrison J, eds.
Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 15.
Elder JS. Anomalies of the penis and urethra. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 581.
Marien T, Kadihasanoglu M, Miller NL. Complications of endoscopic procedures for benign prostatic hyperplasia. In: Taneja SS, Shah O, eds.
Complications of Urologic Surgery.
5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 26.
Virasoro R, Jordan GH, McCammon KA. Surgery for benign disorders of the penis and urethra. In: Partin AW, Domochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology.
12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 82.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Kelly L. Stratton, MD, FACS, Associate Professor, Department of Urology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Urethral Disorders