Multiple myeloma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Multiple myeloma
Multiple myeloma
Multiple myeloma is a blood cancer that starts from a type of white blood cell in the bone marrow called plasma cells. Bone marrow is the soft, spongy tissue found inside most bones in children and in the front chest bone (sternum) and the pelvis bones in adults. The bone marrow makes blood cells.
Plasma cells help your body fight infection by producing proteins called
antibodies
. In people with multiple myeloma, abnormal plasma cells grow out of control in the bone marrow and form tumors in the areas of solid bone. The growth of these bone tumors weakens the bones. It also makes it harder for the bone marrow to make healthy blood cells and platelets.
Causes
The cause of multiple myeloma is unknown. Past treatment with radiation therapy increases the risk for this type of
cancer
. Multiple myeloma mainly affects older adults.
Symptoms
Multiple myeloma most commonly causes:
Low red blood cell count (
anemia
), which can lead to fatigue and shortness of breath
Low white blood cell count, which makes you more likely to get infections
Low platelet count, which can lead to abnormal bleeding
As the cancer cells grow in the bone marrow, you may have bone pain, most often in the ribs or back.
The cancer cells can weaken bones. As a result:
You may develop broken bones (bone fractures) just from doing normal activities.
If cancer grows in the spine bones, it can press on the nerves. This can lead to
numbness
or weakness of the arms or legs.
Frequent infections may occur.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms.
Blood tests are needed to diagnose this disease. These tests may include:
Blood calcium level
Blood total protein level
Kidney and liver function
Complete blood count
(CBC) and
white blood cell differential
Free light chains
Immunofixation
Quantitative immunoglobulins
Serum protein electrophoresis
Urine protein electrophoresis
Bone
x-rays
,
CT scans
,
MRI
, or
PET scan
may show fractures or hollowed out areas of bone. If your provider suspects this type of cancer, a
bone marrow biopsy
will be performed.
Bone density testing may show bone loss.
Treatment
People who have no damage to their bones or body or in whom the diagnosis is not certain are usually closely monitored without giving treatment. This is called smoldering myeloma which can sometimes progress to myeloma that needs treatment.
Various types of medicines are used to treat multiple myeloma. They are most often given to prevent complications such as bone fractures and kidney damage.
Radiation therapy
may be used to relieve bone pain or to shrink a tumor that is pushing on the spinal cord.
bone marrow transplant
may be recommended:
An autologous bone marrow or stem cell transplantation is performed using a person's own stem cells.
An allogeneic transplant uses someone else's stem cells. This treatment has additional risks, but may offer the chance of a cure. However, this is rarely used today.
You and your provider may need to manage other concerns during your treatment, including:
Having chemotherapy at home
Managing your pets
Avoiding infections
Bleeding problems
Dry mouth
Eating enough calories
Safe eating
during cancer treatment
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a
cancer support group
. Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the person's age and the stage of disease. In some cases, the disease progresses very rapidly. In other cases, it takes years for symptoms to appear.
In general, multiple myeloma is treatable, but only in rare cases can it be cured.
Possible Complications
Kidney damage that may lead to
kidney failure
is a frequent complication. Others may include:
Bone fractures
High level of calcium in the blood (
hypercalcemia
), which can be very dangerous
Increased chances for infection, especially in the lungs (pneumonia)
Anemia
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have multiple myeloma and you develop an infection, or numbness, loss of movement, or loss of sensation.
Alternative Names
Plasma cell dyscrasia; Plasma cell myeloma; Malignant plasmacytoma; Plasmacytoma of bone; Myeloma - multiple
Patient Instructions
Bone marrow transplant - discharge
Images
Cryoglobulinemia of the fingers
Immune system structures
Antibodies
References
National Cancer Institute website. Plasma cell neoplasms (including multiple myeloma) treatment (PDQ) - health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/myeloma/hp/myeloma-treatment-pdq
. Updated March 28, 2025. Accessed April 22, 2025.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network website. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: multiple myeloma. Version 1.2025.
www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/myeloma.pdf
. Updated September 17, 2024. Accessed February 10, 2025.
Rajkumar SV, Dispenzieri A. Multiple myeloma and related disorders. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 101.
Rajkumar SV. Plasma cell disorders. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 173.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Multiple Myeloma