Ectropion: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Ectropion
Ectropion
Ectropion is the turning out of the eyelid so that the inner surface is exposed. It most often affects the lower eyelid.
Causes
Ectropion is very often caused by the aging process. The connective (supporting) tissue of the eyelid becomes weak. This causes the lid to turn out so that the inside of the lower lid is no longer against the eyeball. It can also be caused by:
A defect that occurs before birth (for example, in children with
Down syndrome
)
Facial muscle weakness
Scar tissue from burns or injuries
Symptoms
Symptoms include:
Dry, painful eyes
Excess tearing of the eye (
epiphora
)
Eyelid turns outward (downward)
Long-term (chronic)
conjunctivitis
Keratitis
Redness of the lid and white part of the eye
If you have ectropion, you will most likely have excess tearing. This happens because the eye gets dry, then makes more tears. The excess tears can't get into the tear drainage duct. Therefore, they build up inside the lower lid and then spill over the edge of the lid onto the cheek.
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will make a diagnosis by doing an exam of the eyes and eyelids. Special tests are not needed most of the time.
Treatment
Artificial tears (a lubricant) may ease dryness and keep the cornea moist. Ointment may be helpful when the eye can't close all of the way, such as when you are asleep.
Surgery is very often effective. When ectropion is related to aging or paralysis, the surgeon can tighten the muscles that hold the eyelids in place. If the condition is due to scarring of the skin, a skin graft or laser treatment may be used. The surgery is most often done in the office or at an outpatient surgery center. A medicine is used to numb the area (local anesthesia) before the surgery.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome is very often good with treatment.
Possible Complications
Corneal dryness and irritation may lead to:
Corneal abrasions
Corneal ulcers
Eye infections
Corneal ulcers can cause vision loss.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Make an appointment with your provider if you have symptoms of ectropion.
If you have ectropion, get emergency medical help if you have:
Vision that is getting worse
Pain
Sensitivity to light
Eye redness that is getting worse quickly
Prevention
Most cases cannot be prevented. You may want to use artificial tears or ointments to prevent injury to the cornea, especially if you are waiting for a more permanent treatment.
Images
Eye
References
Cioffi GA, Liebmann JM. Diseases of the visual system. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 391.
Maamari RN, Couch SM. Ectropion. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.
Ophthalmology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 12.6.
Olitsky SE, Marsh JD. Abnormalities of the lids. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 664.
Review Date 7/9/2024
Updated by: Audrey Tai, DO, MS, Athena Eye Care, Mission Viejo, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Eyelid Disorders