Dysgraphia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Dysgraphia
Dysgraphia
Dysgraphia is a childhood learning disorder that involves poor writing skills. It is also called disorder of written expression.
Causes
Dysgraphia is as common as other learning disorders.
A child can have dysgraphia only or with other learning disabilities, such as:
Developmental coordination disorder
(includes poor handwriting)
Expressive language disorder
Reading disorder
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Errors in grammar and punctuation
Poor handwriting
Poor spelling
Poorly organized writing
The need to say words aloud when writing
Exams and Tests
Other causes of learning disabilities must be ruled out before the diagnosis can be confirmed.
Treatment
Special (remedial) education is the best approach to this disorder.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The degree of recovery depends on the severity of the disorder. Improvement is often seen after treatment.
Possible Complications
Complications that may occur include:
Learning problems
Low self-esteem
Problems with socializing
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Parents who are concerned about their child's writing ability should have their child tested by educational professionals.
Prevention
Learning disorders often run in families. Affected or potentially affected families should make every effort to recognize problems early. Intervention can begin as early as preschool or kindergarten.
Alternative Names
Written expression disorder; Specific learning disorder with impairment in written expression
References
Grajo LC, Guzman J, Szklut SE, Philibert DB. Learning disabilities and developmental coordination disorder. In: Lazaro RT, Rienna-Guerra SG, Quiben MU, eds.
Umphred's Neurological Rehabilitation.
7th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2020:chap 12.
Kelly DP, McCain DH. Neurodevelopmental and executive function and dysfunction. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 49.
Review Date 10/20/2024
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Learning Disabilities