Neurosyphilis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Neurosyphilis
Neurosyphilis
Neurosyphilis is a bacterial infection of the brain or spinal cord. It usually occurs in people who have had untreated
syphilis
for many years.
Causes
Neurosyphilis is caused by
Treponema pallidum
bacteria. Neurosyphilis usually occurs about 10 to 20 years after a person is first infected with syphilis. Not everyone who has syphilis develops this complication.
There are four different forms of neurosyphilis:
Asymptomatic
(most common form)
General paresis
Meningovascular
Tabes dorsalis
Asymptomatic neurosyphilis occurs before
symptomatic
syphilis. Asymptomatic means there aren't any symptoms.
Symptoms
Symptoms usually affect the nervous system. Depending on the form of neurosyphilis, symptoms may include any of the following:
Abnormal walk
(gait), or unable to walk
Numbness in the toes, feet, or legs
Problems with thinking, such as confusion or poor concentration
Mental problems, such as
depression
or irritability
Headache,
seizures
, or stiff neck
Loss of bladder control (
incontinence
)
Tremors
, or weakness
Visual problems
, even blindness
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will do a physical examination and may find the following:
Abnormal reflexes
Muscle atrophy
Muscle contractions
Mental changes
Blood tests can be done to detect substances produced by the bacteria that cause syphilis, this includes:
Treponema pallidum
particle agglutination assay (TPPA)
Venereal disease research laboratory (
VDRL
) test
Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (
FTA-ABS
)
Rapid plasma reagin (
RPR
)
With neurosyphilis, it is important to
test the spinal fluid
for signs of syphilis.
Tests to look for problems with the nervous system may include:
Cerebral angiogram
Head CT scan
Lumbar puncture
(spinal tap) and
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
MRI
scan of the brain, brainstem, or spinal cord
Treatment
Penicillin (an antibiotic) is used to treat neurosyphilis. It can be given in different ways:
Injected into a vein several times a day for 10 to 14 days.
By mouth 4 times a day, combined with daily muscle injections, both taken for 10 to 14 days.
You must have follow-up blood tests at 3, 6, 12, 24, and 36 months to make sure the infection is gone. You will need follow-up lumbar punctures for CSF analysis every 6 months. If you have HIV/AIDS or another medical condition, your follow-up schedule may be different.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Neurosyphilis is a life-threatening complication of syphilis. How well you do depends on how severe the neurosyphilis is before treatment. The goal of treatment is to prevent further deterioration. Many of these changes will be permanent.
Possible Complications
The symptoms can slowly worsen.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have had syphilis in the past and now have signs of nervous system problems.
Prevention
Prompt diagnosis and treatment of the original syphilis infection can prevent neurosyphilis.
Alternative Names
Syphilis - neurosyphilis
Images
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
Late-stage syphilis
References
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke website. Neurosyphilis.
www.ninds.nih.gov/health-information/disorders/neurosyphilis
. Updated July 19, 2024. Accessed November 27, 2024.
Radolf JD, Tramont EC, Salazar JC. Syphilis (Treponema pallidum). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 237.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Syphilis