Developmental milestones record - 12 months: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Developmental milestones record - 12 months
Developmental milestones record - 12 months
The typical 12-month-old child will demonstrate certain physical and mental skills. These skills are called developmental milestones.
Information
All children develop a little differently. If you are concerned about your child's development, talk to your child's health care provider.
PHYSICAL AND MOTOR SKILLS
A 12-month-old child is expected to:
Be 3 times their birth weight
Grow to a height of 50% over birth length
Have a
head circumference
equal to that of their chest
Have 1 to 8 teeth
Stand without holding on to anything
Walk alone or when holding  one hand
Sit down without help
Bang 2 blocks together
Turn through the pages of a book by flipping many pages at a time
Pick up a small object using the tip of their thumb and index finger
Sleep 8 to 10 hours a night and take 1 to 2 naps during the day
SENSORY AND COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT
The typical 12-month-old:
Begins pretend play (such as pretending to drink from a cup)
Follows a fast moving object
Responds to their name
Can say momma, papa, and at least 1 or 2 other words
Understands simple commands
Tries to imitate animal sounds
Connects names with objects
Understands that objects continue to exist, even when they can't be seen (object constancy)
Participates in getting dressed (raises arms)
Plays simple back and forth games (ball game)
Points to objects with the index finger
Waves goodbye
May develop an attachment to a toy or object
Experiences
separation anxiety
and may cling to parents
May make brief journeys away from parents to explore in familiar settings
PLAY
You can help your 12-month-old develop skills through play:
Provide picture books.
Provide different stimuli, such as going to the mall or zoo.
Play ball.
Build vocabulary by reading and naming people and objects in the environment.
Teach hot and cold through play.
Provide large toys that can be pushed to encourage walking.
Sing songs.
Have a play date with a child of a similar age.
Avoid television and other screen time until age 2 years.
Try using a transitional object to help with separation anxiety.
Alternative Names
Normal childhood growth milestones - 12 months; Growth milestones for children - 12 months; Childhood growth milestones - 12 months; Well child - 12 months
References
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Practice & Ambulatory Medicine. 2024 Recommendations for preventive pediatric health care: Policy statement.
Pediatrics
.2024;154(1):e2024067201. PMID: 38910527
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38910527/
.
Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Schuh AM. Normal development. In: Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, eds.
Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 7.
Onigbanjo MT, Feigelman S. The first year. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 23.
Review Date 10/20/2024
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Infant and Newborn Development
Toddler Development