Yew poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Yew poisoning
Yew poisoning
The yew plant is a shrub with evergreen-like leaves. Yew poisoning occurs when someone eats pieces of this plant. The plant is most poisonous in winter.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Poisonous ingredients include:
Taxine
Taxol
Where Found
Taxine is found in various kinds of the yew plant. The poison is in most parts of the yew plant, but the highest amount is in the seeds.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Altered mental status (stupor, confusion, decreased awareness)
Blue-colored lips
(cyanosis)
Breathing difficulty
Coma
(unresponsiveness, lack of consciousness)
Convulsions
Diarrhea
Dizziness
Enlarged (dilated) pupils
Headache
Muscle weakness
Nausea and vomiting
Rapid collapse
Slow, fast, or irregular heartbeat
Stomach pain
Tremor (shaking of the arms or legs)
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name and part of the plant that was swallowed, if known
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen through a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine ventilator)
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Fluids by IV (through the vein)
Laxatives
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Symptoms last for 1 to 3 days and may require a hospital stay. Death is unlikely.
DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods.
References
Auerbach PS, Constance BB, Freer L. Toxic Plants. In: Auerbach PS, Constance BB, Freer L, eds.
Field Guide to Wilderness Medicine.
5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 40.
Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 65.
Lim CS, Aks SE. Plants, herbal medications, and mushrooms. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 153.
Yarnell EL.
Taxus brevifolia
(Pacific yew). In: Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, eds.
Textbook of Natural Medicine.
5th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2021:chap 118.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning