Satiety - early  : MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Satiety - early
Satiety - early
Satiety is the satisfied feeling of being full after eating. Early satiety is feeling full sooner than normal or after eating less than usual.
Causes
Causes may include:
Gastric outlet obstruction
Heartburn
Nervous system problem that causes delayed stomach emptying
Stomach or abdominal tumor
Stomach (peptic) ulcer
Home Care
Follow your health care provider's advice.
A liquid diet may be helpful.
You may need to keep a detailed diet log. This is a place where you write down what you eat, how much, and when.
You may be more comfortable if you eat small, frequent meals rather than big meals.
A diet high in fat or high in fiber may worsen the feeling.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
The feeling lasts for days to weeks and does not get better.
You lose weight without trying.
You have dark stools.
You have nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, or bloating.
You have fever and chills.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will examine you and ask questions such as:
When did this symptom begin?
How long does each episode last?
What foods, if any, make the symptoms worse?
What other symptoms do you have (for example, vomiting, excessive gas, abdominal pain, or weight loss)?
Tests that may be performed include:
Complete blood count
and
blood differential
to check for anemia
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
(EGD)
Stool tests for bleeding
X-ray studies of the stomach, esophagus, and small intestine (abdominal x-ray and an
upper GI and small bowel series
)
Stomach-emptying studies
Alternative Names
Abdominal fullness prematurely after meals
Images
Digestive system organs
References
Koch KL. Gastric neuromuscular function and neuromuscular disorders. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 50.
Szabo C, Tantawy H. Diseases of the gastrointestinal system. In: Hines RL, Jones SB, eds.
Stoelting's Anesthesia and Co-Existing Disease
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 17.
Review Date 8/7/2023
Updated by: Michael M. Phillips, MD, Emeritus Professor of Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Digestive Diseases