Watercolor paints - swallowing: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Watercolor paints - swallowing
Watercolor paints - swallowing
This article discusses the health problems that might occur when someone swallows watercolor paints. This can happen by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
The substances in watercolor paints that can be harmful are:
Man-made or natural pigments (especially cadmium and cobalt)
Gum arabic
Note:
Watercolor paints sold for home use are generally considered nonpoisonous.
Symptoms
A person would have to eat several tubes of watercolors before symptoms occur.
Home Care
Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
If the person swallowed the paint, give them water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. Do not give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness.
Use soap and water to wash any paint off skin and clothes.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
A trip to the emergency room is normally not necessary.
However, if the person needs medical help, the provider will measure and monitor their vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator)
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Fluids through the veins (by IV)
Laxatives
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
Recovery is likely because watercolor paints are generally considered nonpoisonous.
How well someone does depends on how much paint they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
Alternative Names
Paint - watercolors
References
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Theobald JL, Kostic MA. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 77.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.