Varicose vein - noninvasive treatment: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Varicose vein - noninvasive treatment
Varicose vein - noninvasive treatment
Varicose veins
are swollen, tortuous, and sometimes painful veins that have filled with blood that does not drain out in a normal fashion.
Description
Varicose veins most often develop in the legs. They often stick out and are blue in color.
Normally, valves in your veins keep your blood flowing up toward the heart, so the blood does not collect in one place.
The valves in varicose veins have been damaged or are missing. This causes the veins to become filled with blood, especially when you are standing.
The following treatments for varicose veins can be done in a health care provider's office or clinic. You will receive local anesthesia to numb your leg. You will be awake, but will not feel pain.
Sclerotherapy
works best for spider veins. These are small varicose veins.
Salt water (saline) or a chemical solution is injected into the varicose vein.
The vein will harden and then disappear.
Laser treatment
can be used on the surface of the skin. Small bursts of light can make small varicose veins disappear.
Phlebectomy
treats surface varicose veins. Very small cuts are made near the damaged vein. Then the vein is removed. One method uses a light under the skin to guide treatment.
This may be done along with other procedures, such as ablation.
Ablation
uses intense heat to treat the vein. There are two methods. One uses radiofrequency energy and the other uses laser energy. During these procedures:
Your provider will puncture the varicose vein.
Your provider will thread a flexible tube (catheter) through the vein.
The catheter will send intense heat to the vein. The heat will close off and destroy the vein and the vein will disappear over time.
Why the Procedure is Performed
You may have varicose vein therapy to treat:
Varicose veins that cause problems with blood flow
Leg pain and feeling of heaviness
Skin changes or skin sores that are caused by too much pressure in the veins
Blood clots or swelling in the veins
Undesirable appearance of the leg
Risks
These treatments are generally safe. Ask your provider about specific problems that you might have.
The risks for any anesthesia and surgery are:
Allergic reactions to medicines
Breathing problems
Bleeding
, bruising, or infection
The risks of varicose vein therapy are:
Blood clots
Nerve damage
Failure to close the vein
Opening of the treated vein
Vein irritation
Bruising or scarring
Return of the varicose vein over time
Before the Procedure
Tell your provider or nurse if:
You are or could be pregnant.
You are taking any medicines, including medicines, drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription.
You have been drinking a lot of alcohol, more than 1 or 2 drinks a day.
Planning for your surgery:
If you have
diabetes
,
heart disease
, or other medical conditions, you may be asked to see the provider who treats you for these conditions.
If you smoke, it's important to cut back or quit.
Smoking can slow healing and increase the risk of blood clots
. Ask your provider for help
quitting smoking
.
If needed,
prepare your home
to make it easier to recover after surgery.
Ask your provider if you need to arrange to have someone drive you home after your procedure.
During the week before your procedure:
You may be asked to temporarily stop taking medicines that keep your blood from clotting. These medicines are called blood thinners. This includes over-the-counter medicines and supplements such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and vitamin E. Many prescription medicines are also blood thinners.
Ask your provider which medicines you should still take on the day of your procedure.
Let your provider know about any illness you may have before your procedure. This includes
COVID-19
, a
cold
,
flu
, fever, herpes breakout, or other illness. If you do get sick, your procedure may need to be postponed.
On the day of your procedure:
Follow instructions about when to stop eating and drinking.
Take the medicines your provider told you to take with a small sip of water.
Arrive at the hospital on time.
After the Procedure
Your legs will be wrapped with bandages to control swelling and bleeding for 2 to 3 days after your treatment.
You should be able to start normal activities within 1 to 2 days after treatment. You will need to wear
compression stockings
during the day for 1 week after treatment.
Your leg may be checked using ultrasound a few days after treatment to make sure the vein is sealed.
Outlook (Prognosis)
These treatments reduce pain and improve the appearance of the leg. Most of the time, they cause very little scarring, bruising, or swelling.
Wearing compression stockings will help prevent the problem from returning.
Alternative Names
Sclerotherapy; Laser therapy - varicose veins; Radiofrequency vein ablation; Endovenous thermal ablation; Ambulatory phlebectomy; Transilluminated power phlebotomy; Endovenous laser ablation; Varicose vein therapy
Patient Instructions
Varicose veins - what to ask your doctor
Images
Varicose veins
References
Goldman MP, Weiss RA. Phlebology and treatment of leg veins. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds.
Dermatology
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 155.
Sadek M, Kabnick LS. Varicose veins: endovenous ablation and sclerotherapy. In: Sidawy AN, Perler BA, eds.
Rutherford's Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 155.
Sharma A, Wasan S. Varicose veins. In: Creager MA, Beckman JA, Loscalzo J, eds.
Vascular Medicine: A Companion to Braunwald's Heart Disease
. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 53.
Review Date 1/29/2025
Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, MHCI, RPVI, FSIR, CEO & Medical Director, 360 Vascular Institute, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Columbus, OH. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Varicose Veins