Sputum stain for mycobacteria: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Sputum stain for mycobacteria
Sputum stain for mycobacteria
Sputum stain for mycobacteria is a test to check for a type of bacteria that cause
tuberculosis
and other infections.
How the Test is Performed
This test requires a sample of sputum.
You will be asked to cough deeply and spit any substance that comes up from your lungs (sputum) into a special container.
You may be asked to breathe in a mist of salty steam. This makes you cough more deeply and produce sputum.
If you still do not produce enough sputum, you might have a procedure called a
bronchoscopy
to collect a sputum sample.
To increase the accuracy, this test is sometimes done 3 times, often 3 days in a row.
The test sample is examined under a microscope. This sputum stain test can give your health care provider a quick answer. Another test, called a
culture
, is done to confirm the results. A culture test may take several (6 to 10) weeks to get results.
How to Prepare for the Test
Drinking fluids the night before the test helps your lungs produce phlegm. It makes the test more accurate if it is done first thing in the morning.
If you are having a bronchoscopy, follow your provider's instructions on how to prepare for the procedure.
How the Test will Feel
There is no discomfort, unless a bronchoscopy needs to be performed.
Why the Test is Performed
The test is performed when your provider suspects tuberculosis or other mycobacterium infection.
Normal Results
Results are normal when no mycobacterial organisms are found.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results show that the stain is positive for:
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mycobacterium avium-intracellular
Other mycobacteria or acid-fast bacteria
Risks
There are no risks with this test, unless a bronchoscopy is performed.
Alternative Names
Acid fast bacilli stain; AFB stain; Tuberculosis smear; TB smear
Images
Sputum test
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Tuberculosis (TB).
www.cdc.gov/tb/index.html
. Updated October 30, 2024. Accessed December 22, 2024.
Rodino KG, Woods GL, Wengenack NL. Mycobacteria. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 59.
Shete PB, Cattamanchi A, Yoon C. Tuberculosis: clinical manifestations and diagnosis. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 53.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Mycobacterial Infections
Tuberculosis