Alcoholic ketoacidosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
Alcoholic ketoacidosis is the buildup of ketones in the blood due to alcohol use. Ketones are a type of acid that form when the body breaks down fat for energy.
The condition is an
acute
form of
metabolic acidosis
, a condition in which there is too much acid in body fluids.
Causes
Alcoholic ketoacidosis is caused by very heavy alcohol use. It most often occurs in a
malnourished
person who drinks large amounts of alcohol every day.
Symptoms
Symptoms of alcoholic ketoacidosis include:
Nausea and vomiting
Abdominal pain
Agitation
,
confusion
Changed level of alertness, which may lead to coma
Fatigue
, slow movements
Deep, labored,
rapid breathing
Loss of appetite
Symptoms of
dehydration
, such as dizziness, lightheadedness, and thirst
Exams and Tests
Tests may include:
Arterial
blood gases
(measures the acid/base balance and oxygen level in blood)
Blood alcohol level
Blood chemistries and liver function tests
CBC (complete blood count), measures red and white blood cells, and platelets, which help blood to clot
Prothrombin time (PT), measures blood clotting, often abnormal from liver disease
Toxicology study (checking for other poisons in your body)
Urine ketones
Treatment
Treatment may involve fluids (salt and sugar solution) given through a vein. You may need to have frequent blood tests. You may get vitamin supplements to treat malnutrition caused by excessive alcohol use.
People with this condition are usually admitted to the hospital, often to the intensive care unit (ICU). Alcohol use is stopped to help recovery. Medicines may be given to prevent
alcohol withdrawal
symptoms.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Prompt medical attention improves the overall outlook. How severe the alcohol use is, and the presence of liver disease or other problems, may also affect the outlook.
Possible Complications
This can be a life-threatening condition. Complications may include:
Coma and seizures
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Inflamed pancreas
(pancreatitis)
Pneumonia
When to Contact a Medical Professional
If you or someone else has symptoms of alcoholic ketoacidosis, seek emergency medical help.
Prevention
Limiting the amount of alcohol you drink will help prevent this condition.
Alternative Names
Ketoacidosis - alcoholic; Alcohol use - alcoholic ketoacidosis
References
Finnell JT. Alcohol-related disease. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 137.
O'Connor PG. Alcohol use disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 30.
Review Date 6/12/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD)