Death among children and adolescents: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Death among children and adolescents
Death among children and adolescents
The information below is from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Accidents (unintentional injuries) are, by far, the leading cause of death among children and teens.
THE TOP THREE CAUSES OF DEATH BY AGE GROUP
0 to less than 28 days after birth:
Conditions due to premature birth (short gestation) and low birth weight
Developmental and genetic conditions that were present at birth
Maternal complications of pregnancy
28 days through 11 months after birth:
Sudden infant death syndrome
(SIDS)
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
Developmental and genetic conditions that were present at birth
1 to 4 years:
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
Developmental and genetic conditions that were present at birth
Homicide
5 to 9 years:
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
Cancer
Homicide
10 to 14 years
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
Suicide (intentional self-harm)
Cancer
CONDITIONS PRESENT AT BIRTH
Some birth defects cannot be prevented. Other problems may be diagnosed during pregnancy. These conditions, when recognized, may be prevented or treated while the baby is still in the womb or right after birth.
Tests that may be done before or during pregnancy include:
Amniocentesis
Chorionic villus sampling
Fetal ultrasound
Genetic screening of the parents
Medical histories and childbirth history of the parents
PREMATURITY AND LOW BIRTH WEIGHT
Death due to prematurity often results from a lack of
prenatal care
. If you are pregnant and are not receiving prenatal care, contact your health care provider or local department of health. Most state health departments have programs that provide prenatal care to mothers, even if they do not have insurance and are not able to pay.
All sexually active and pregnant teens and women should be educated about the importance of prenatal care.
SUICIDE
It is important to watch teens for signs of stress,
depression
, and
suicidal behavior
. Open communication between the teen and parents or other people of trust is very important for preventing teen suicide.
If you or someone you know is thinking about suicide, call or text 988 or chat 988lifeline.org. You can also call 1-800-273-8255 (1-800-273-TALK). The 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline provides free and confidential support 24/7, anytime day or night.
You can also call 911 or the local emergency number or go to the hospital emergency room. Do not delay.
HOMICIDE
Homicide is a complex issue that does not have a simple answer. Prevention requires an understanding of the root causes and a willingness of the public to change those causes.
AUTO ACCIDENTS
The automobile accounts for the largest number of accidental deaths. All infants and children should use the proper child car seats, booster seats, and seat belts.
Other top causes of accidental death are drowning, fire, falls, and poisoning.
Alternative Names
Childhood and adolescent causes of death
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Child health.
www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/child-health.htm
. Updated November 1, 2024. Accessed January 14, 2025.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Deaths: Leading causes for 2021. National vital statistics reports. Vol. 73, Number 4.
www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr73/nvsr73-04.pdf
. Updated April 8, 2024. Accessed July 23, 2024.
Review Date 7/16/2024
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 01/14/2025.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Health Statistics