Hairy cell leukemia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hairy cell leukemia
Hairy cell leukemia
Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is an unusual cancer of the blood. It affects B lymphocyte cells, a type of white blood cell.
Causes
HCL is caused by the abnormal growth of certain B cells. The cells look "hairy" under the microscope because they have fine projections extending from their surface.
HCL usually leads to a low number of normal blood cells.
The cause of this disease is unknown. Certain genetic changes in the cancer cells may be the cause. It affects men more often than women. The average age of diagnosis is 55.
Symptoms
Symptoms of HCL may include any of the following:
Easy
bruising
or bleeding
Heavy sweating (especially at night)
Fatigue
and weakness
Feeling full after eating only a small amount
Recurrent infections and fevers
Pain or fullness in the upper left belly (
enlarged spleen
)
Swollen lymph glands
Weight loss
Exams and Tests
During a physical exam, your health care provider may be able to feel a
swollen spleen
or liver. An
abdominal CT scan
or
ultrasound
may be done to evaluate this swelling.
Blood tests that may be done include:
Complete blood count
(CBC) to check low levels of white and red blood cells, as well as
platelets
.
Blood tests and a
bone marrow biopsy
to check for hairy cells.
Treatment
Treatment may not be needed for the early stages of this disease. Some people may need an occasional blood transfusion.
If treatment is needed because of very low blood counts,
chemotherapy
medicines can be used.
In most cases, chemotherapy can relieve the symptoms for many years. When the signs and symptoms go away, you are said to be in remission.
Removing the spleen
may improve blood counts, but is unlikely to cure the disease. Antibiotics can be used to treat infections. People with low blood counts may receive growth factors and, possibly, transfusions.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most people with HCL can expect to live 10 years or longer after diagnosis and treatment.
Possible Complications
The low blood counts caused by hairy cell leukemia can lead to:
Infections
Fatigue
Excessive bleeding
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have major bleeding. Also contact your provider if you have signs of infection, such as a persistent
fever
,
cough
, or
general ill feeling
.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent this disease.
Alternative Names
Leukemic reticuloendotheliosis; HCL; Leukemia - hairy cell
Images
Bone marrow aspiration
Hairy cell leukemia - microscopic view
Enlarged spleen
References
National Cancer Institute website. Hairy cell leukemia treatment (PDQ) health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/leukemia/hp/hairy-cell-treatment-pdq
. Updated September 20, 2024. Accessed December 3, 2024.
Nasr MR, Hutchison RE. Leukocytic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 34.
Ravandi F. Hairy cell leukemia. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 77.
Review Date 6/17/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Leukemia