Fussy or irritable child: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Fussy or irritable child
Fussy or irritable child
Young children who cannot talk yet will let you know when something is wrong by acting fussy or irritable. If your child is fussier than usual, it could be a sign that something is wrong.
Causes
It is normal for children to get fussy or whiny sometimes. There are lots of reasons why children get fussy:
Lack of sleep
Hunger
Frustration
Fight with a sibling
Being too hot or too cold
Your child also may be worried about something. Ask yourself if there has been stress, sadness, or anger in your home. Young children are sensitive to stress at home, and to the mood of their parents or caregivers.
A baby who cries for longer than 3 hours a day might have colic. Learn ways that you can
help your baby with colic
.
Many common childhood illnesses can cause a child to be fussy. Most illnesses are easily treated. They include:
Ear infection
Teething or a toothache
Cold or flu
Bladder infection
Stomach pain or stomach flu
Headache
Constipation
Pinworm
Poor sleep patterns
Although less common, your child's fussiness may be an early sign of a more serious problem, such as:
Diabetes, asthma, anemia (low blood count), or other health problem
Serious infections, such as an infection in the
lungs
,
kidneys
, or around
the brain
Head injury that you did not see happen
Hearing or speech problems
Autism or abnormal brain development (if fussiness does not go away and becomes more severe)
Depression or other mental health problems
Pain, such as headache or stomach ache
Home Care
Soothe your child as you would normally. Try rocking, cuddling, talking, or doing things your child finds calming.
Address other factors that may be causing fussiness:
Poor sleep patterns
Noise or stimulation around your child (too much or too little can be a problem)
Stress around the home
Irregular day-to-day schedule
Using your parenting skills, you should be able to calm your child and make things better. Getting your child on a regular eating, sleeping, and daily schedule can also help.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
As a parent, you know your child's usual behavior. If your child is more irritable than usual and cannot be comforted, contact your child's health care provider.
Watch for and report other symptoms, such as:
Belly pain
Crying that persists
Fast breathing
Fever
Poor appetite
Racing heartbeat
Rash
Vomiting or diarrhea
Sweating
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your child's provider will work with you to learn why your child is irritable. During the office visit, the provider will:
Ask questions and take a history
Examine your child
Order lab tests, if needed
Alternative Names
Inconsolability; Irritability
Images
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
References
Onigbanjo MT, Feigelman S. The first year. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 22.
Zhou D, Sequeira S, Driver D, Thomas S. Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. In: Driver D, Thomas SS, eds.
Complex Disorders in Pediatric Psychiatry: A Clinician's Guide
. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2018:chap 15.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Common Infant and Newborn Problems
Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems