Jimsonweed poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Jimsonweed poisoning
Jimsonweed poisoning
Jimsonweed is a tall herb plant. Jimsonweed poisoning occurs when someone sucks the juice or eats the seeds from this plant. You can also be poisoned by drinking tea made from the leaves.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Poisonous ingredients include:
Atropine
Hyoscine (scopolamine)
Hyoscyamine
Tropane alkaloids
Note:
This list may not include all poisonous ingredients.
Where Found
The poison is found in all parts of the plant, especially the leaves and seeds.
Symptoms
Symptoms of jimsonweed poisonings can affect various body systems.
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Little to no urine production (urinary retention)
Abdominal pain (from urinary retention)
EYES, EARS, NOSE, THROAT, AND MOUTH
Blurred vision
Dilated (enlarged) pupils
Dry mouth
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Nausea and vomiting
HEART AND BLOOD
Elevated blood pressure
Rapid pulse
, irregular pulse
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Coma
(lack of responsiveness)
Seizures
(convulsions)
Death
Delirium
(agitation, severe confusion)
Dizziness
Hallucinations
Headache
Mumbling and incoherent speech
Repetitive picking behavior
SKIN
Red skin
Hot, dry skin
WHOLE BODY
Fever
Thirst
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the plant, if known
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Breathing support, including oxygen through a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator)
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Fluids by IV (through the vein)
Laxatives
Medicines to treat symptoms, including an antidote to reverse the effects of the poison
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Symptoms last for 1 to 3 days and may require a hospital stay. Death is unlikely.
DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods.
Alternative Names
Angel's trumpet; Devil's weed; Thorn apple; Tolguacha; Jamestown weed; Stinkweed; Datura; Moonflower
References
Aminoff MJ, So YT. Effects of toxins and physical agents on the nervous system. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 86.
Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 65.
Lim CS, Aks SE. Plants, herbal medications, and mushrooms. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 153.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning