Phosphorus in diet: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Phosphorus in diet
Phosphorus in diet
Phosphorus is a mineral that makes up 1% of a person's total body weight. It is the second most abundant mineral in the body. It is present in every cell of the body. Most of the phosphorus in the body is found in the bones and teeth.
Function
The main function of phosphorus is in the formation of bones and teeth.
It plays an important role in how the body uses
carbohydrates
and fats. It is also needed for the body to make
protein
for the growth, maintenance, and repair of cells and tissues. Phosphorus also helps the body make ATP, a molecule the body uses to store energy.
Phosphorus works with the B vitamins. It also helps with the following:
Kidney function
Muscle contractions
Normal heartbeat
Nerve signaling
Food Sources
The main food sources are the protein food groups of meat and milk, as well as processed foods that contain sodium phosphate. A diet that includes the right amounts of calcium and protein will also provide enough phosphorus.
Whole-grain breads and cereals contain more phosphorus than cereals and breads made from refined flour. However, the phosphorus is stored in a form that is not absorbed by humans.
Fruits and vegetables contain only small amounts of phosphorus.
Side Effects
Phosphorus is so readily available in the food supply that deficiency is rare.
Excessively high levels of phosphorus in the blood, although rare, can combine with calcium to form deposits in soft tissues, such as muscle. High levels of phosphorus in blood only occur in people with severe kidney disease or severe dysfunction of their calcium regulation.
Recommendations
Dosages for phosphorus, as well as other nutrients, are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. DRI is a term for a set of reference intakes that are used to plan and assess the nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA):
The average daily level of intake that is enough to meet the nutrient needs of nearly all (97% to 98%) healthy people. An RDA is an intake level based on scientific research evidence.
Adequate Intake (AI):
This level is established when there is not enough scientific research evidence to develop an RDA. It is set at a level that is thought to ensure enough nutrition.
Dietary Reference Intakes of phosphorus:
0 to 6 months: 100 milligrams per day (mg/day)*
7 to 12 months: 275 mg/day*
1 to 3 years: 460 mg/day
4 to 8 years: 500 mg/day
9 to 18 years: 1,250 mg
Adults: 700 mg/day
Pregnant or lactating women:
Younger than 18: 1,250 mg/day
Older than 18: 700 mg/day
*AI or Adequate Intake
Alternative Names
Diet - phosphorus
References
Klemm KM, Klein MJ, Zhang Y. Biochemical markers of bone metabolism. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 16.
National Institutes of Health website. Phosphorous: fact sheet for health professionals.
ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Phosphorous-HealthProfessional/
. Updated May 4, 2023. Accessed February 4, 2025.
Yu ASL. Disorders of magnesium and phosphorus. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 105.
Review Date 1/21/2025
Updated by: Stefania Manetti, RDN, CDCES, RYT200, My Vita Sana LLC - Nourish and heal through food, San Jose, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Minerals