Gas gangrene: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Gas gangrene
Gas gangrene
Gas gangrene is a potentially deadly form of tissue death (
gangrene
).
Causes
Gas gangrene is most often caused by bacteria called
Clostridium perfringens.
Also, it can occasionally be caused caused by group A streptococcus,
Staphylococcus aureus,
and
Vibrio vulnificus
.
Clostridium is found nearly everywhere. As the bacteria grow inside the body, they emit gas and harmful substances (toxins) that can damage body tissues, cells, and blood vessels.
Gas gangrene develops suddenly. It usually occurs at the site of trauma or a recent surgical wound. In some cases, it occurs without an irritating event. People most at risk for gas gangrene usually have blood vessel disease (
atherosclerosis
, or hardening of the arteries),
diabetes
, or
colon cancer
.
Symptoms
Gas gangrene causes very painful
swelling
. The skin turns pale to brownish-red. When the swollen area is pressed, gas can be felt (and sometimes  heard)  as a crackly sensation (crepitus). The edges of the infected area grow so quickly that changes can be seen over minutes. The area may be completely destroyed.
Symptoms include:
Air under the skin (
subcutaneous emphysema
)
Blisters filled with brown-red fluid
Drainage from the tissues, foul-smelling brown-red or bloody fluid (
serosanguineous
discharge)
Increased heart rate (
tachycardia
)
Moderate to high fever
Moderate to severe pain around a skin injury
Pale skin color, later becoming dusky and changing to dark red or purple
Swelling that worsens around a skin injury
Sweating
Vesicle
formation, combining into large blisters
Yellow color to the skin (
jaundice
)
If the condition is not treated, the person can go into
shock
with decreased blood pressure (
hypotension
),
kidney failure
, coma, and finally death.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may reveal signs of shock.
Tests that may be done include:
Tissue and fluid cultures to test for bacteria including clostridial species
Blood culture to determine the bacteria causing the infection
Gram stain of fluid from the infected area
X-ray
,
CT scan
, or
MRI
of the area, which may show gas in the tissues
Treatment
Surgery is needed quickly to remove dead, damaged, and infected tissue.
Surgical removal (amputation) of an arm or leg may be needed to control the spread of infection. Amputation sometimes must be done before all test results are available.
Antibiotics are also given. These medicines are given through a vein (intravenously). Pain medicines may also be prescribed.
In some cases,
hyperbaric oxygen treatment
may be tried.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Gas gangrene usually begins suddenly and quickly gets worse. It is often deadly.
Possible Complications
Complications that may result include:
Coma
Delirium
Disfiguring or disabling permanent tissue damage
Jaundice with liver damage
Kidney failure
Shock
Spread of infection through the body (
sepsis
)
Stupor
Death
When to Contact a Medical Professional
This is an emergency condition requiring immediate medical attention.
Contact your provider if you have signs of infection around a skin wound. Go to the emergency room or call 911 or the local emergency number, if you have symptoms of gas gangrene.
Prevention
Clean any skin injury thoroughly. Watch for signs of infection (such as redness, pain, drainage, or swelling around a wound). See your provider promptly if these occur.
Alternative Names
Tissue infection - clostridial; Gangrene - gas; Myonecrosis; Clostridial infection of tissues; Necrotizing soft tissue infection
Images
Gas gangrene
Gas gangrene
Bacteria
References
Onderdonk AB, Garrett WS. Diseases caused by clostridium. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 246.
Thompson NB. Hand infections. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, eds.
Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics.
14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 79.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Gangrene