Schizoid personality disorder: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Schizoid personality disorder
Schizoid personality disorder
Schizoid personality disorder is a mental condition in which a person has a lifelong pattern of indifference to others and social isolation.
Causes
The cause of this disorder is unknown. It may be related to
schizophrenia
and shares many of the same risk factors.
Schizoid personality disorder is not as disabling as schizophrenia. It doesn't cause the disconnection from reality (in the form of
hallucinations
or delusions) that occurs in schizophrenia.
Symptoms
A person with schizoid personality disorder often:
Appears distant and detached
Avoids social activities that involve emotional closeness with other people
Does not want or enjoy close relationships, even with family members
Exams and Tests
This disorder is diagnosed based on a psychological evaluation. The health care provider will consider how long and how severe the person's symptoms are.
Treatment
People with this disorder often won't seek treatment. For this reason, little is known about which treatments work. Talk therapy may not be effective. This is because people with this disorder may have a hard time forming a good working relationship with a therapist.
One approach that seems to help is to put fewer demands for emotional closeness or intimacy on the person.
People with schizoid personality disorder often do well in relationships that don't focus on emotional closeness. They tend to be better at handling relationships that focus on:
Work
Intellectual activities
Expectations
Outlook (Prognosis)
Schizoid personality disorder is a long-term (chronic) illness that usually does not improve much over time. Social isolation often prevents the person from asking for help or support.
Limiting expectations of emotional intimacy may help people with this condition make and keep connections with other people.
Alternative Names
Personality disorder - schizoid
References
American Psychiatric Association. Schizoid personality disorder.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision
(DSM-5-TR), Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association Publishing; 2022.
Blais MA, Rivas-Vazquez R, Ruchensky JR, Stein MB. Personality and personality disorders. In: Stern TA, Wilens TE, Fava M, eds.
Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 37.
Review Date 7/17/2024
Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Personality Disorders