Diesel oil: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Diesel oil
Diesel oil
Diesel oil is a heavy oil used in diesel engines. Diesel oil poisoning occurs when someone swallows diesel oil.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Various hydrocarbons
Where Found
Diesel oil
Symptoms
Diesel oil poisoning can cause symptoms in many parts of the body.
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Loss of vision
Severe pain in the throat
Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
Blood in the stool
Burns of the throat (esophagus)
Severe
abdominal pain
Vomiting
Vomiting blood
HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
Collapse
Low blood pressure
that develops rapidly (shock)
LUNGS AND AIRWAYS
Breathing difficulty
Empyema (infected fluid surrounding the lungs)
Hemorrhagic pulmonary edema (bloody fluid in the lungs)
Lung irritation and cough
Respiratory distress or failure
Pneumothorax (lung collapse, partial or complete)
Pleural effusion (fluid surrounding the lungs, reducing their ability to expand)
Secondary bacterial or viral infection
Throat swelling (may also cause breathing difficulty)
Many of the most dangerous effects of hydrocarbon (such as diesel oil) poisoning are due to inhaling the fumes.
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Blurred vision
Brain damage from low oxygen levels (may lead to memory issues and decreased ability to think clearly)
Coma (decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness)
Confusion
Decreased coordination
Dizziness
Headache
Seizures
Somnolence (sleepiness and decreased responsiveness)
Weakness
SKIN
Burns
Irritation
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional.
If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. Do not give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow.
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
The person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen given through a tube through the mouth into the lungs,and breathing machine (ventilator)
Bronchoscopy -- camera down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs
Chest x-ray
ECG (heart tracing)
Endoscopy -- camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus (swallowing tube) and the stomach
Fluids through the vein (by IV)
Medicine to treat symptoms
Surgical removal of burned skin (skin debridement)
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to aspirate (suck out) the stomach, but only in cases of massive ingestion if the victim is seen within an hour of swallowing the poison and if there is no injury to the esophagus
Washing of the skin (irrigation), perhaps every few hours for several days
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well the person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster the person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Swallowing diesel fuel can damage the linings of the:
Esophagus
Intestines
Mouth
Stomach
Throat
Serious and permanent damage can occur if the diesel gets into the lungs.
Delayed injury may occur, including a hole forming in the throat, esophagus, stomach or lungs. This can lead to severe bleeding and infection, and may be fatal. Surgery may be needed to treat these complications.
The harsh taste of diesel fuel makes it unlikely that a large amount will be swallowed. However, cases of poisoning have occurred in people trying to suck (siphon) gas from an automobile tank using their mouth and a garden hose (or similar tube). This practice is very dangerous and is not advised.
Alternative Names
Oil
References
Kuschner WG, Blanc PD. Acute responses to toxic exposures. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 103.
Wang GS, Buchanan JA. Hydrocarbons. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 147.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.