Adrenocortical carcinoma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Adrenocortical carcinoma
Adrenocortical carcinoma
Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a cancer of the
adrenal glands
. The adrenal glands are two triangle-shaped glands. One gland is located on top of each kidney.
Causes
ACC is most common in children younger than 5 years old and adults in their 40s and 50s.
The condition may be linked to a cancer syndrome that is passed down through families (inherited). Both men and women can develop this tumor.
ACC can produce the hormones cortisol, aldosterone, estrogen, or testosterone, as well as other hormones. In women the tumor often releases these hormones, which can lead to male characteristics.
ACC is very rare. The cause is unknown.
Symptoms
Symptoms of increased cortisol or other adrenal gland hormones may include:
Fatty, rounded hump high on the back just below the neck (
buffalo hump
)
Flushed, rounded face with pudgy cheeks (
moon face
)
Obesity
Stunted growth (
short stature
)
Virilization
-- the appearance of male characteristics, including increased body hair (especially on the face), pubic hair, acne, deepening of the voice, and enlarged clitoris (females)
Symptoms of increased aldosterone are the same as symptoms of low potassium, and include:
Muscle cramps
Weakness
Pain in the abdomen
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms.
Blood tests will be done to check hormone levels:
ACTH
level will be low.
Aldosterone
level will be high.
Cortisol
level will be high.
Potassium
level will be low.
Male or female hormones may be abnormally high.
Imaging tests of the abdomen may include:
Ultrasound
CT scan
MRI
PET scan
Treatment
The primary treatment is surgery to remove the tumor. ACC may not improve with
chemotherapy
. Medicines may be given to reduce production of cortisol, which causes many of the symptoms.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome depends on how early the diagnosis is made and whether the tumor has spread (metastasized). Tumors that have spread usually lead to death within 1 to 3 years.
Possible Complications
The tumor can spread to the liver, bone, lung, or other areas.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you or your child has symptoms of ACC,
Cushing syndrome
, or failure to grow.
Alternative Names
Tumor - adrenal; ACC - adrenal
Images
Endocrine glands
Adrenal metastases - CT scan
Adrenal Tumor - CT
References
Habra M, Else T, Fassnacht M. Adrenocortical carcinoma. In: Robertson RP, ed.
DeGroot's Endocrinology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 98.
National Cancer Institute website. Adrenocortical carcinoma treatment (PDQ) - health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/adrenocortical/hp/adrenocortical-treatment-pdq
. Updated August 25, 2022. Accessed August 27, 2024.
Yeh MW, Livhits M, Duh Q-Y. The adrenal glands. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, et al, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery
. 21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 40.
Review Date 8/21/2024
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Adrenal Gland Cancer