Blue nightshade poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Blue nightshade poisoning
Blue nightshade poisoning
Blue nightshade poisoning occurs when someone eats parts of the blue nightshade plant.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
The poisonous ingredients are:
Atropine
Solanine (which is very poisonous, even in small amounts)
Where Found
The poison is found in the blue nightshade (
Solanum dulcamara
) plant, especially in the fruit and leaves.
Symptoms
Blue nightshade poisoning can affect many parts of the body:
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Dry mouth
Enlarged (dilated) pupils
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
Stomach pain
HEART AND BLOOD
Pulse -- slow
Shock
LUNGS
Slow breathing
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Delirium
(agitation and confusion)
Hallucinations
Headache
Loss of sensation
Paralysis
WHOLE BODY
Sweating or dry skin
Elevated body temperature (hyperthermia)
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the plant, if known
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen through a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator)
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms and reverse the effects of the poison (antidote)
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Symptoms last for 1 to 3 days and may require a hospital stay. Death is unlikely.
DO NOT touch or eat any unfamiliar plant. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods.
Alternative Names
Bittersweet poisoning; Bitter nightshade poisoning; Scarlet berry poisoning; Weedy nightshade poisoning
References
Auerbach PS, Constance BB, Freer L. Toxic plants. In: Auerbach PS, Constance BB, Freer L, eds.
Field Guide to Wilderness Medicine.
5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 40.
Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 65.
Higgins T. Wild plant and mushroom poisoning. In: Higgins T, ed.
Medicine for the Outdoors
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:422-430.
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM. Nonbacterial food poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.
21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 740.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning