Iron in diet: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Iron in diet
Iron in diet
Iron is a mineral found in every cell of the body. Iron is considered an essential mineral because it is needed to make hemoglobin, a part of blood cells. The body cannot make it, so it must be taken in with the food we eat.
Function
The human body needs iron to make the oxygen-carrying proteins
hemoglobin
and myoglobin. Hemoglobin is found in red blood cells. Myoglobin is found in muscles.
Food Sources
The best sources of iron include:
Dried beans
Dried fruits
Eggs (especially egg yolks)
Iron-fortified cereals
Liver
Lean red meat (especially beef)
Oysters
Poultry, dark red meat
Salmon
Tuna
Whole grains
Reasonable amounts of iron are also found in lamb, pork, and shellfish.
Iron from vegetables, fruits, grains, and supplements is harder for the body to absorb. Plant sources include:
Dried fruits:
Prunes
Raisins
Apricots
Legumes:
Lima beans
Soybeans
Dried beans and peas
Kidney beans
Seeds:
Almonds
Brazil nuts
Vegetables:
Broccoli
Spinach
Kale
Collards
Asparagus
Dandelion greens
Whole grains:
Wheat
Millet
Oats
Brown rice
If you mix some lean meat, fish, or poultry with beans or dark leafy greens at a meal, you can improve absorption of vegetable sources of iron up to three times. Foods rich in
vitamin C
(such as citrus, strawberries, tomatoes, and potatoes) also increase iron absorption. Cooking foods in a cast-iron skillet can also help to increase the amount of iron provided.
Some foods reduce iron absorption. For example, black teas contain substances that bind to dietary iron so it cannot be used by the body.
Side Effects
LOW IRON LEVEL
The human body stores some iron to replace any that is lost. However, a low iron level over a long period of time can lead to iron deficiency anemia. Symptoms include lack of energy, shortness of breath, headache, irritability,
dizziness
, or weight loss. Physical signs of lack of iron are a pale tongue and spoon-shaped nails.
Those at risk for a low iron level include:
Women who are menstruating, especially if they have heavy periods
Women who are pregnant or who have just had a baby
Long-distance runners
People with any type of bleeding in the digestive tract (for example, a bleeding ulcer)
People who frequently donate blood
People with gastrointestinal conditions that make it hard to absorb nutrients from food
Babies and young children are at risk for a low iron level if they do not get the right foods. Babies moving to solid foods should eat iron-rich foods. Infants are born with enough iron to last about six months. An infant's extra iron needs are met by breast milk. Infants who are not breastfed should be given an iron supplement or iron-fortified infant formula.
Children between age 1 and 4 years grow fast. This uses up iron in the body. Children of this age should be given iron-fortified foods or an iron supplement.
Milk is a very poor source of iron. Children who drink large quantities of milk and avoid other foods may develop "milk anemia." The recommended milk intake is 2 to 3 cups (480 to 720 milliliters) per day for toddlers.
TOO MUCH IRON
The genetic disorder called
hemochromatosis
affects the body's ability to control how much iron is absorbed. This leads to too much iron in the body. Treatment consists of a low-iron diet, no iron supplements, and phlebotomy (blood removal) on a regular basis.
It is unlikely that a person would take too much iron. However, children can sometimes develop iron poisoning by swallowing too many iron supplement pills or liquid. Symptoms of iron poisoning include:
Fatigue
Anorexia
Dizziness
Nausea
Vomiting
Headache
Weight loss
Shortness of breath
Grayish color to the skin
Recommendations
Dosages for iron, as well as other nutrients, are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. DRI is a term for a set of reference intakes that are used to plan and assess the nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): The average daily level of intake that is enough to meet the nutrient needs of nearly all (97% to 98%) healthy people. An RDA is an intake level based on scientific research evidence.
Adequate Intake (AI): This level is established when there is not enough scientific research evidence to develop an RDA. It is set at a level that is thought to ensure enough nutrition.
Dietary Reference Intakes for iron:
Infants and children
Younger than 6 months: 0.27 milligrams per day (mg/day)*
7 months to 1 year: 11 mg/day
1 to 3 years: 7 mg/day
4 to 8 years: 10 mg/day
*AI or Adequate Intake
Males (RDA)
9 to 13 years: 8 mg/day
14 to 18 years: 11 mg/day
Age 19 and older: 8 mg/day
Females (RDA)
9 to 13 years: 8 mg/day
14 to 18 years: 15 mg/day
19 to 50 years: 18 mg/day
51 and older: 8 mg/day
Pregnant women of all ages: 27 mg/day
Lactating women 19 to 50 years: 9 mg/day (age 14 to 18: 10 mg/day)
Women who are pregnant or producing breast milk may need different amounts of iron. Ask your health care provider what is right for you.
Alternative Names
Diet - iron; Ferric acid; Ferrous acid; Ferritin
Images
Iron supplements
References
Hopkins AC. Nutrition and growth. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook, The
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 21.
Mason JB, Booth SL. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 199.
Markell M, Siddiqi HA. Vitamins and trace elements. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 27.
National Institutes of Health website. Iron: fact sheet for health professionals.
ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Iron-HealthProfessional/
. Updated October 9, 2024. Accessed February 4, 2025.
Saint-Syr M, Waldrop SW, Krebs NF. Nutritional requirements. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 60.
Review Date 1/21/2025
Updated by: Stefania Manetti, RDN, CDCES, RYT200, My Vita Sana LLC - Nourish and heal through food, San Jose, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Iron