Joint pain: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Joint pain
Joint pain
Joint pain can affect one or more joints.
Causes
Joint pain can be caused by many types of injuries or conditions. It may be linked to
arthritis
,
bursitis
, and
muscle pain
. No matter what causes it, joint pain can be very bothersome. Some things that can cause joint pain are:
Autoimmune diseases such as
rheumatoid arthritis
and
lupus
Bursitis
Chondromalacia patellae
Crystals in the joint --
gout
(especially found in the big toe) and CPPD arthritis (pseudogout)
Infections caused by a virus
Injury, such as a fracture
Osteoarthritis
Osteomyelitis
(bone infection)
Septic arthritis
(joint infection)
Tendinitis
Unusual exertion or overuse, including strains or
sprains
Signs of joint inflammation include:
Swelling
Warmth
Tenderness
Redness
Pain with movement
Home Care
Follow your health care provider's advice for treating the cause of your pain.
For non-arthritic joint pain, both rest and exercise are important. Warm baths, massage, and stretching exercises should be used as often as possible.
Acetaminophen (Tylenol) may help the soreness feel better.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen or naproxen may help relieve pain and swelling. Talk to your provider before giving aspirin or NSAIDs such as ibuprofen to children.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You have
fever
that is not associated with
flu
symptoms.
You have lost 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) or more without trying (
unintended weight loss
).
Your joint pain lasts for more than several days.
You have severe, unexplained joint pain and swelling, particularly if you have other unexplained symptoms.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will ask you questions about your medical history and symptoms, including:
Which joint hurts? Is the pain on one side or both sides?
What started the pain and how often have you had it? Have you had it before?
Did this pain begin suddenly and severely, or slowly and mildly?
Is the pain constant or does it come and go? Has the pain become more severe?
Have you injured your joint?
Have you had an illness,
rash
, or fever?
Does resting or moving make the pain better or worse? Are certain positions more or less comfortable? Does keeping the joint elevated help?
Do medicines, massage, or applying heat reduce the pain?
What other symptoms do you have?
Is there any
numbness
?
Can you bend and straighten the joint? Does the joint feel stiff?
Are your joints stiff in the morning? If so, for how long does the stiffness last?
What makes the stiffness better?
A physical exam will be done to look for signs of joint abnormality including:
Swelling
Tenderness
Warmth
Pain with motion
Abnormal motion such as limitation, loosening of the joint, grating sensation
Tests that may be done include:
Complete blood count (CBC)
or
blood differential
C-reactive protein
Sedimentation rate
Blood tests specific to various autoimmune disorders
Joint aspiration
to obtain joint fluid for culture, white cell count and examination for crystals
Joint x-ray
Treatments may include:
Medicines such as NSAIDs including ibuprofen, naproxen, or indomethacin
Injection of a corticosteroid medicine into the joint
Antibiotics and often surgical drainage, in case of infection (usually requires hospitalization)
Physical therapy for muscle and joint rehabilitation
Alternative Names
Stiffness in a joint; Pain - joints; Arthralgia; Arthritis
Images
The structure of a joint
Skeleton
Rheumatoid arthritis
References
Bykerk VP, Crow MK. Approach to the patient with rheumatic disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 236.
Davis JM, Moder KG, Hunder GG. History and physical examination of the musculoskeletal system. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, Koretzky GA, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds.
Firestein & Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 43.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Neil J. Gonter, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Columbia University, NY and private practice specializing in Rheumatology at Rheumatology Associates of North Jersey, Teaneck, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Joint Disorders