Histoplasmosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis is an infection that occurs from breathing in the
spores
of the fungus
Histoplasma capsulatum
.
Causes
Histoplasmosis occurs throughout the world. In the United States, it is most common in the southeastern, mid-Atlantic, and central states, especially in the Mississippi and Ohio River valleys.
Histoplasma fungus grows as a mold in the soil. You may get sick when you breathe in spores produced by the fungus. Soil that contains bird or bat droppings may have larger amounts of this fungus. The threat is greatest after an old building is torn down, or in caves.
This infection can occur in people with a healthy immune system. Having a weakened immune system increases the risk of getting or reactivating this disease. Very young or very old people, or those with HIV/AIDS,
cancer
, or an organ transplant have more severe symptoms.
People with long-term (chronic) lung disease (such as
emphysema
and
bronchiectasis
) are also at higher risk for a more severe infection.
Symptoms
Most people have no symptoms, or only have a mild, flu-like illness.
If symptoms do occur, they may include:
Fever and
chills
Cough and
chest pain
that gets worse when breathing in
Joint pain
Mouth sores
Red skin bumps, most often on the lower legs
The infection may be active for a short period of time, and then the symptoms go away. Sometimes, the lung infection may become chronic. Symptoms include:
Chest pain and shortness of breath
Cough, possibly coughing up blood
Fever and sweating
In a small number of people, especially in those with a weakened immune system, histoplasmosis spreads throughout the body. This is called disseminated histoplasmosis. In response to the infection irritation and swelling (inflammation) occur in parts of the body. Symptoms may include:
Chest pain from inflammation of the sac-like covering around the heart (
pericarditis
)
Headache and neck stiffness from swelling of the membranes covering of the brain and spinal cord (
meningitis
)
High fever
Exams and Tests
Histoplasmosis is diagnosed by:
Biopsy
of the lung, skin, liver, or bone marrow
Urine or
blood
tests to detect histoplasma proteins or antibodies
Cultures of the blood
,
urine
, or
sputum
(this test provides the clearest diagnosis of histoplasmosis, but results can take 6 weeks)
To help diagnose this condition, your health care provider may do a:
Bronchoscopy
(test that uses a viewing scope inserted into the lung airway to check for signs of infection)
Chest CT scan
Chest x-ray
Spinal tap
to look for signs of infection in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Treatment
In otherwise healthy people, this infection usually goes away without treatment.
If you are sick for more than 1 month or are having trouble breathing, your provider may prescribe medicine. The main treatment for histoplasmosis is antifungal medicines.
Antifungals may need to be given through a vein, depending on the form or stage of the disease.
Some of these medicines can have side effects.
Long-term treatment with antifungal medicines may be needed for up to 1 to 2 years.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on how severe the infection is, and your general health condition. Some people get better without treatment. An active infection will usually go away with antifungal medicine. But, the infection may leave scarring inside the lung.
The death rate is higher for people with untreated disseminated histoplasmosis who have a weakened immune system.
Possible Complications
Scarring in the chest cavity may put pressure on the:
Major blood vessels carrying blood to and from the heart
Heart
Esophagus (food pipe)
Lymph nodes
Enlarged lymph nodes in the chest may press on body parts such as the esophagus and blood vessels of the lungs.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you live in an area where histoplasmosis is common and you develop:
Flu-like symptoms
Chest pain
Cough
Shortness of breath
While there are many other illnesses that have similar symptoms, you may need to be tested for histoplasmosis.
Prevention
Histoplasmosis may be prevented by reducing your exposure to dust in chicken coops, bat caves, and other high-risk locations. Wear masks and other protective equipment if you work in or go into these environments.
Alternative Names
Fungal infection - histoplasmosis; Ohio River Valley fever; Fibrosing mediastinitis
Images
Lungs
Acute histoplasmosis
Disseminated histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis, disseminated in HIV patient
Fungus
References
Deepe GS.
Histoplasma capsulatum
(histoplasmosis). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 263.
Thompson GR, Miceli MH. Endemic mycoses. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 308.
Review Date 10/11/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Histoplasmosis