Dengue fever: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Dengue fever
Dengue fever
Dengue fever is a virus-caused disease that is spread by mosquitoes. Dengue in its mild form causes fever and a rash and lasts about a week. Severe dengue can cause shock, internal bleeding, and death. About 1 out of 20 people with dengue will develop severe dengue within a few hours after symptoms start. The main risk factor for severe dengue is a prior infection with dengue.
Causes
Dengue fever is caused by 1 of 4 different but related viruses. It is spread by the bite of mosquitoes, most commonly the mosquito
Aedes aegypti
, which is found in tropic and subtropic regions. This area includes parts of:
The Indonesian archipelago into northeastern Australia
South and Central America
Southeast Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
The Caribbean (including Puerto Rico and US Virgin Islands)
Dengue fever is rare in the US mainland, but has been found in Hawaii, Florida, and Texas. Since 2022, dengue has also been reported in California and Arizona.
Many cases in the United States occur when someone travels to an area where dengue is present and returns home with the illness. Dengue cannot spread from human to human.
Symptoms
Dengue fever begins with a sudden high fever, often as high as 105 °F (40.6 °C), 4 to 7 days after the infection.
A flat, red rash may appear over most of the body 2  to 5 days after the fever starts. A second rash, which looks like
measles
, appears later in the disease. Infected people may have increased skin sensitivity and are very uncomfortable.
Other symptoms include:
Fatigue
Headache (especially behind the eyes)
Joint aches
(often severe)
Muscle aches
(often severe)
Nausea and vomiting
Swollen lymph nodes
Cough
Sore throat
Nasal stuffiness
Symptoms of severe dengue can occur 24 to 48 hours after the fever has gone away. Severe symptoms include:
Severe stomach pain and tenderness
Vomiting often (at least 3 times in 24 hours)
Bleeding from the nose or gums
Vomiting blood or passing blood in the stools or urine
Bleeding under the skin (looks like bruises)
Difficulty breathing, rapid breathing
Feeling tired, restless, or irritable
If you or anyone you know has symptoms of severe dengue, call 911 or the local emergency number right away.
Exams and Tests
Tests that may be done to diagnose this condition include:
Antibody titer
for dengue virus types
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for dengue virus types
Liver function tests
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for dengue fever. Fluids are given if there are signs of
dehydration
. Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is used to treat a high fever.
Avoid taking aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), and naproxen (Aleve). They may increase bleeding problems.
Severe dengue is a medical emergency. It must be treated immediately at a hospital. Treatment for severe dengue is supportive and may include:
Fluids given through a vein (IV)
Oxygen support
Blood pressure management
Blood transfusions
Outlook (Prognosis)
Mild cases of dengue generally last a week or more. Although uncomfortable, mild dengue fever is not deadly. People with the condition should fully recover. In some Latin American and Asian countries, severe dengue is a leading cause of death and severe illness. Early detection and treatment of severe dengue can greatly reduce the risk of death.
Possible Complications
Untreated, dengue fever may cause the following health problems:
Febrile
convulsions
Severe dehydration
Death
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have traveled in an area where dengue fever is known to occur and you have symptoms of the disease.
Prevention
To prevent dengue, take steps to prevent mosquito bites:
Use insect repellent daily and reapply as needed.
Wear loose-fitting, long-sleeved shirts and pants.
Spray clothing and hats with permethrin (an insecticide that repels mosquitos), but do not apply to skin.
Sleep under mosquito netting if sleeping outside or if there are no screens on windows.
Limit outdoor activity during mosquito season, especially when they are most active, at dawn and dusk.
When traveling, check to see if dengue is present in the area you will be traveling. Bring protective clothing, mosquito repellent, and netting if needed.
Alternative Names
O'nyong-nyong fever; Dengue-like disease; Breakbone fever; Dengue hemorrhagic fever
Images
Mosquito, adult feeding on the skin
Dengue fever
Mosquito, adult
Mosquito, egg raft
Mosquito - larvae
Mosquito, pupa
Antibodies
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Dengue. About dengue.
www.cdc.gov/dengue/about/index.html
. Updated May 14, 2024. Accessed December 2, 2024.
Endy TP. Viral febrile illnesses and emerging pathogens. In: Ryan ET, Hill DR, Solomon T, Aronson NE, Endy TP, eds.
Hunter's Tropical Medicine and Emerging Infectious Diseases
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 36.
Thomas SJ, Endy TP, Rothman AL, Barrett AD. Flaviviruses (dengue, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis, West Nile encephalitis, Usutu encephalitis, St. Louis encephalitis, tick-borne encephalitis, Kyasanur forest disease, Alkhurma hemorrhagic fever, Zika). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 153.
World Health Organization website. Dengue and severe dengue.
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dengue-and-severe-dengue
. Updated April 23, 2024. Accessed December 2, 2024.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Dengue