Thioridazine overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Thioridazine overdose
Thioridazine overdose
Thioridazine is an older, first generation antipsychotic prescription medicine used to treat serious mental and emotional disorders, including schizophrenia. Thioridazine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual
overdose
. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Thioridazine
Where Found
Thioridazine hydrochloride is the generic name of this medicine.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of an overdose of thioridazine in different parts of the body.
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Cannot completely empty the bladder
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Blurred vision
Drooling
Dry mouth
Nasal congestion
Swallowing difficulties
Ulcers in the mouth, on the tongue, or in the throat
Vision color changes (brown tinge)
Yellow eyes
HEART AND BLOOD
Rapid heartbeat
Slow heartbeat
Irregular heartbeat
High or very low blood pressure
LUNGS
Difficulty breathing
Fluid buildup in the lungs
Breathing may stop in severe cases
MOUTH, STOMACH, AND INTESTINAL TRACT
Constipation
Loss of appetite
Nausea
MUSCLES AND BONES
Muscle spasms
Muscle stiffness
Neck or face stiffness
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Drowsiness,
coma
Difficulty walking
Dizziness
Fever
Hypothermia
(body temperature is lower than normal)
Seizures
Tremor
Weakness, lack of coordination
OTHER
Menstrual changes
Blue discoloration of the skin
(changing to a purplish color)
Home Care
Get medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the medicine and the strength of the medicine, if known
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your
local poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.  This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs
CT scan of the brain
ECG
(electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (IV, given through a vein)
Laxative
Medicine (sodium bicarbonate) to help reverse the effect of the poison
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach
(
gastric lavage
)
X-rays (chest and abdomen)
Outlook (Prognosis)
Recovery depends on the amount of damage to the person's body. Survival past 2 days is usually a good sign. The most serious side effects are usually due to damage to the heart. If heart damage can be stabilized, recovery is likely. But if breathing has been depressed for a long period before treatment, brain injury may occur.
Alternative Names
Thioridazine hydrochloride overdose
References
Aronson JK. Thioridazine. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:895-899.
Monas J, Skolnik AB. Antipsychotics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 150.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.