Feeding tube insertion - gastrostomy: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Feeding tube insertion - gastrostomy
Feeding tube insertion - gastrostomy
A gastrostomy feeding tube (G-tube) insertion is the placement of a feeding tube through the skin and the stomach wall. It goes directly into the stomach.
Description
Gastrostomy feeding tube insertion is done in part using a procedure called
endoscopy
. This is a way of looking inside the body using a flexible tube with a small camera on the end of it. The endoscope is inserted through the mouth and down the esophagus, which leads to the stomach.
After the endoscopy tube is inserted into the stomach, the skin over the left side of the belly (abdomen) area is cleaned and numbed. Your surgeon makes a small surgical cut in this area. The G-tube is inserted through this cut into the stomach. The tube is small, flexible, and hollow. Your surgeon uses stitches to close the stomach around the tube.
Why the Procedure is Performed
Gastrostomy feeding tubes are put in for different reasons. They may be needed for a short time or permanently. This procedure may be used for:
Babies with birth defects of the mouth, esophagus, or stomach (for example,
esophageal atresia
or tracheal esophageal
fistula
)
People who cannot swallow correctly
People who cannot take enough food by mouth to stay healthy
People who often breathe in food when eating
Risks
Risks for surgical or endoscopic feeding tube insertion are:
Bleeding
Infection
Before the Procedure
You will be given a sedative and a painkiller. In most cases, these medicines are given through a vein (
IV
line) in your arm. You should feel no pain and not remember the procedure.
A numbing medicine may be sprayed into your mouth to prevent the urge to cough or gag when the endoscope is inserted. A mouth guard will be inserted to protect your teeth and the endoscope.
Dentures must be removed.
After the Procedure
This is most often a simple surgery with a good outlook. Follow any
self-care instructions
you're given, including:
How to care for the skin around the tube
Signs and symptoms of infection
What to do if the tube is pulled out
Signs and symptoms of tube blockage
How to empty the stomach through the tube
How and what to feed through the tube
How to hide the tube under clothing
What normal activities can be continued
Outlook (Prognosis)
The stomach and abdomen will heal in 5 to 7 days. Moderate pain can be treated with medicine. Feedings will start slowly with clear liquids, and increase slowly.
Alternative Names
Gastrostomy tube insertion; G-tube insertion; PEG tube insertion; Stomach tube insertion; Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube insertion
Images
Gastrostomy tube placement  - series
References
Kessel D, Robertson I. Treating gastrointestinal conditions. In: Kessel D, Robertson I, eds.
Interventional Radiology: A Survival Guide.
4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 42.
Murray TE, Lee MJ. Gastrostomy and jejunostomy. In: Mauro MA, Murphy KP, Thomson KR, Venbrux AC, Morgan RA, eds.
Image-Guided Interventions.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 91.
Twyman SL, Davis PW. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy placement and replacement. In: Fowler GC, ed.
Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care.
4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 92.
Review Date 5/29/2024
Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, General Surgery Practice Specializing in Breast Cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Nutritional Support