Blastomycosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Blastomycosis
Blastomycosis
Blastomycosis is an infection caused by breathing in the
Blastomyces dermatitidis
fungus. This fungus is found in decaying wood and soil.
Causes
You can get blastomycosis by contact with moist soil, most commonly where there is rotting wood and leaves. The fungus enters the body through the lungs, where the infection starts. The fungus can then spread to other parts of the body. The disease may affect the skin, bones and joints, and other areas.
Blastomycosis is rare. It occurs in the central and southeastern United States, and in Canada, India, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Africa.
The key risk factor for the disease is contact with infected soil. It most often affects people with weakened immune systems, such as those with HIV/AIDS or who have had an organ transplant, but it can also infect healthy people. Men are more likely to be affected than women.
Symptoms
Lung infection may not cause any symptoms. Symptoms may be seen if the infection spreads. Symptoms may include:
Joint pain
Chest pain
Cough (may produce brown or bloody mucus)
Fatigue
Fever
Night sweats
General discomfort, uneasiness, or ill feeling (
malaise
)
Muscle pain
Unintentional weight loss
Most people develop skin symptoms when the infection spreads. You may get papules,
pustules
, or nodules on exposed body areas.
The pustules:
May look like warts or ulcers
Are usually painless
Vary in color from gray to violet
May appear in the nose and mouth
Bleed easily and form ulcers
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. You'll be asked about your medical history and symptoms.
If the provider suspects you have a fungal infection, diagnosis can be confirmed by these tests:
Chest CT scan
Chest x-ray
Skin
biopsy
Sputum culture
and exam
Urinary
antigen
detection
Tissue biopsy and culture
Urine culture
Treatment
You may not need to take medicine for a mild blastomycosis infection that stays in the lungs. Your provider may recommend the following antifungal medicines when the disease is severe or spreads outside of the lungs.
Fluconazole
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Amphotericin B may be used for severe infections.
Follow up regularly with your provider to make sure the infection does not return.
Outlook (Prognosis)
People with minor skin sores (lesions) and mild lung infections usually recover completely. The infection can lead to death if not treated.
Possible Complications
Complications of blastomycosis may include:
Large sores with pus (
abscesses
)
Skin sores can lead to scarring and loss of skin color (pigment)
Return of the infection (relapse or disease recurrence)
Side effects from medicines such as amphotericin B
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of blastomycosis.
Prevention
Avoiding travel to areas where the infection is known to occur may help prevent exposure to the fungus, but this may not always be possible.
Alternative Names
North American blastomycosis; Gilchrist disease
Patient Instructions
Leg amputation - discharge
Images
Respiratory system
Fungus
Lung tissue biopsy
Osteomyelitis
References
Elewski BE, Hughey LC, Hunt KM, Hay RJ. Fungal diseases. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds.
Dermatology. 5
th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 77.
Gauthier GM, Klein BS. Blastomycosis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 264.
Thompson GR, Miceli MH. Endemic mycoses. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 308.
Review Date 8/29/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Fungal Infections
Skin Infections