Candles poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Candles poisoning
Candles poisoning
Candles are made out of wax. Candle poisoning occurs when someone swallows candle wax. This can happen by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
The substances in candles that can be harmful are:
Beeswax
Paraffin wax
Man-made (synthetic) wax
Vegetable oil based wax
Symptoms
Candle wax is considered nonpoisonous, but it may cause a
blockage in the intestines
if a large amount is swallowed. A person who is allergic to the scent or color ingredients in the candle may have an allergic reaction from touching the candle. Symptoms may include rash or blistering of the skin, or swelling, tearing or redness of the eye if it has been touched by the fingers which had contact with the candles.
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
A trip to the emergency room may not be necessary.
If medical care is needed, the provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
The person may receive a laxative to help the wax move quickly through the stomach and intestines. This will help prevent a bowel blockage.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Candle wax is considered nonpoisonous, and recovery is very likely.
How well someone does depends on how much wax they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
References
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Theobald JL, Kostic MA. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 77.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.