Meningococcemia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Meningococcemia
Meningococcemia
Meningococcemia is an
acute
and potentially life-threatening infection of the bloodstream.
Causes
Meningococcemia is caused by bacteria called
Neisseria meningitidis
. The bacteria often live in a person's upper respiratory tract without causing signs of illness. They can be spread from person to person through respiratory droplets. For example, you may become infected if you are around someone with the condition and they sneeze or cough.
Family members and those closely exposed to someone with the condition are at increased risk. The infection occurs more often in winter and early spring.
Symptoms
Some of the initial symptoms include:
Fever
Headache
Irritability
Muscle pain
Nausea
Rash with very small red or purple spots on the feet or legs
Later symptoms may include:
decline in your level of consciousness
Large areas of bleeding under the skin
Shock
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms.
Blood tests will be done to check for other infections and help confirm meningococcemia. Such tests may include:
Blood culture
Complete blood count
with white cell differential
Blood clotting studies
Other tests that may be done include:
Lumbar puncture
to get a sample of cerebrospinal fluid for
Gram stain
and
culture
Skin biopsy
and Gram stain and culture
Urine analysis
Treatment
Meningococcemia is a medical emergency. People with this infection are often admitted to the intensive care unit of the hospital, where they are closely monitored. They may be placed in respiratory isolation for the first 24 hours to help prevent the spread of the infection to others.
Treatments may include:
Antibiotics given through a vein immediately
Breathing support
Clotting factors or platelet replacement, if
bleeding disorders
develop
Fluids through a vein
Medicines to treat low blood pressure
Wound care for areas of skin with blood clots
Outlook (Prognosis)
Early treatment results in a good outcome. When shock develops, the outcome is less certain.
The condition is most life threatening in those who develop:
A severe bleeding disorder called
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC
)
Kidney failure
Shock
Possible Complications
Possible complications of this infection are:
Arthritis
Bleeding disorder (DIC)
Gangrene
due to lack of blood supply
Inflammation of blood vessels in the skin
Inflammation of the heart muscle
Inflammation of the heart lining
Shock
Severe damage to the adrenal glands that can lead to low blood pressure (
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Go to the emergency room immediately if you have symptoms of meningococcemia. Contact your provider if you have been around someone with the disease.
Prevention
Preventive antibiotics for family members and other close contacts are often recommended. Contact your provider about this option.
vaccine
that covers some, but not all, strains of meningococcus is recommended for children age 11 or 12. A booster is given at age 16. Unvaccinated college students who live in dormitories should also consider receiving this vaccine. It should be given a few weeks before they first move into the dorm. Talk to your provider about this vaccine.
Alternative Names
Meningococcal septicemia; Meningococcal blood poisoning; Meningococcal bacteremia
References
Marquez L. Meningococcal disease. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.
Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 88.
Stephens DS, Apicella MA. Neisseria meningitidis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 211.
Stephens DS. Neisseria meningitidis infections. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 274.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Meningococcal Disease