Folic acid - test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Folic acid - test
Folic acid - test
Folic acid is also called vitamin B9. This article discusses the test to measure the amount of folic acid in the blood. It is often done together with a vitamin B12 test of the blood.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
You should not eat or drink for 6 hours before the test. Your health care provider may tell you to stop taking any medicines that may interfere with test results, including folic acid supplements.
Medicines that can decrease folic acid measurements include:
Alcohol
Aminosalicylic acid
Birth control pills
Estrogens
Tetracyclines
Ampicillin
Chloramphenicol
Erythromycin
Methotrexate
Penicillin
Aminopterin
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Medicines to treat malaria
How the Test will Feel
You may feel slight pain or a little sting when the needle is inserted. There may be some throbbing at the site.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is done to check for
folic acid deficiency
.
Folic acid helps form red blood cells and produce DNA that stores genetic codes. Taking the right amount of folic acid before and during pregnancy helps prevent neural tube defects, such as spina bifida.
Women who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant should take at least 600 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid every day. It may be provided by prenatal vitamins and certain foods, such as enriched bread, flour, and cereal. Some women may need to take more if they have a history of neural tube defects in earlier pregnancies. Ask your provider how much you should take.
Normal Results
The normal range is 2.7 to 17.0 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) or 6.12 to 38.52 nanomoles per liter (nmol/L).
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your test results.
The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some labs use different measurements or may test different specimens.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Lower-than-normal folic acid levels may indicate:
Poor diet
Malabsorption
syndrome (for example,
celiac disease
)
Malnutrition
The test may also be done in cases of:
Anemia
that may be due to folate deficiency
Megaloblastic anemia -- a form of anemia which can be due to low folic acid or vitamin B12 levels
Risks
There is very little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other slight risks from having blood drawn may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Alternative Names
Folate - test
References
Antony AC. Megaloblastic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 40.
Elghetany MT, Banki K. Erythrocytic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 33.
Mason JB, Booth SL. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Cooney Ka, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 199.
Stabler SP. Megaloblastic anemias. In: Goldman L, Cooney Ka, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 150.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Folic Acid