Retrograde cystography: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Retrograde cystography
Retrograde cystography
Retrograde cystography is a detailed
x-ray
of the bladder. Contrast dye is placed into the bladder through the urethra. The urethra is the tube that carries urine from the bladder to the outside of the body.
How the Test is Performed
You will lie on a table. A numbing medicine is applied to the opening to your urethra. A flexible tube (catheter) is inserted through your urethra into the bladder. Contrast dye flows through the tube until your bladder is full or you tell the technician that your bladder feels full.
When the bladder is full, you are placed in different positions so that x-rays can be taken. A final x-ray is taken once the catheter is removed and you have emptied your bladder. This reveals how well your bladder empties.
The test takes about 30 to 60 minutes.
How to Prepare for the Test
You must sign an informed consent form. You must empty your bladder before the test. You will be asked questions to determine if you may have an
allergic reaction
to the contrast dye, or if you have a current infection that could make inserting the catheter difficult.
How the Test will Feel
You may feel some pressure when the catheter is inserted. You will feel an urge to urinate when the contrast dye enters the bladder. The person performing the test will stop the flow when the pressure becomes uncomfortable. The urge to urinate will continue throughout the test.
After the test, the area where the catheter was placed may feel sore when you urinate.
Why the Test is Performed
You may need this test to examine your bladder for problems such as holes or tears, or to find out why you have repeated bladder infections. It is also used to look for problems such as:
Abnormal connections between bladder tissue and a nearby structure (bladder fistulae)
Bladder stones
Pouch-like sacs called
diverticula
on the walls of the bladder or urethra
Tumor of the bladder
Urinary tract infection
Vesicoureteric reflux
(urine flowing backward from the bladder into the ureter)
Normal Results
The bladder appears normal.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may be due to:
Bladder stones
Blood clots
in the bladder
Bladder diverticula
Bladder infection or inflammation
Bladder lesions
Vesicoureteric reflux
Risks
There is some risk for infection from the catheter. Symptoms may include:
Burning during urination
(after the first day)
Chills
Decreased blood pressure (hypotension)
Fever
Increased
heart rate
Increased breathing rate
The amount of radiation exposure is similar to that of other x-rays. As with any radiation exposure, nursing or pregnant women should only have this test if it is determined that the benefits outweigh the risks.
Considerations
In males, testicles are shielded from the x-rays.
This test is not performed very often. It is most often done along with CT scan imaging for better resolution.
Voiding cystourethrogram
(VCUG) or
cystoscopy
is used more often.
Alternative Names
Cystography - retrograde; Cystogram
Images
Vesicoureteral reflux
Cystography
References
Bishoff JT, Rastinehad AR. Urinary tract imaging: basic principles of CT, MRI, and plain film imaging. In: Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 3.
Zagoria RJ, Dyer R, Brady C. An introduction to radiologic methods. In: Zagoria RJ, Dyer R, Brady C, eds.
Genitourinary Imaging: The Requisites
. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 1.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Kelly L. Stratton, MD, FACS, Associate Professor, Department of Urology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bladder Diseases
Urinary Tract Infections
X-Rays