Mycobacterial culture : MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Mycobacterial culture
Mycobacterial culture
Mycobacterial culture is a test to look for the bacteria that cause
tuberculosis
and other infections caused by similar bacteria.
How the Test is Performed
A sample of body fluid or tissue is needed. This sample may be taken from the lungs, liver, or bone marrow.
Most often, a
sputum sample will be taken
. To obtain a sample, you will be asked to cough deeply and spit out the material that comes up from your lungs.
biopsy
or
aspiration
may also be done.
The sample is sent to a laboratory. There it is placed in a special dish (culture). It is then watched for up to 6 weeks to see if the bacteria grow.
How to Prepare for the Test
Preparation depends on how the test is done. Follow your health care provider's instructions.
How the Test will Feel
How the test will feel depends on the specific procedure. Your provider can discuss this with you before the test.
Why the Test is Performed
Your provider may order this test if you have signs of tuberculosis or a related infection.
Normal Results
If there is no disease present, there will be no growth of bacteria in the culture medium.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
or similar bacteria is present in the culture.
Risks
Risks depend on the specific biopsy or aspiration being performed.
Alternative Names
Culture - mycobacterial
Images
Liver culture
Sputum test
References
Fitzgerald DW, Sterling TR, Haas DW. Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 249.
Rodino KG, Woods GL, Wengenack NL. Mycobacteria. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.
24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 59.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Mycobacterial Infections
Tuberculosis