Chagas disease: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Chagas disease
Chagas disease
Chagas disease is an illness caused by tiny parasites and spread by insects. The disease is common in South and Central America.
Causes
Chagas disease is caused by the parasite
Trypanosoma cruzi.
It is spread by the bite of reduviid bugs, or kissing bugs, and is one of the major health problems in South America. Due to travel and immigration, the disease also affects people in the United States.
Risk factors for Chagas disease include:
Living in a hut where reduviid bugs live in the walls
Living in Central or South America
Poverty
Receiving a blood transfusion or an organ donation from a person who carries the parasite, but does not have active Chagas disease
Symptoms
Chagas disease has two phases:
acute
and
chronic
. The acute phase may have no symptoms or very mild symptoms, including:
Fever
General ill feeling
Swelling of an eye if the bite is near the eye
Swollen red area at the site of the insect bite
After the acute phase, the disease goes into remission. There may be no other symptoms for many years. When symptoms finally develop, they may include:
Constipation
Digestive problems
Pain in the abdomen
Swallowing difficulties
Pounding or racing heart
Heart failure
Exams and Tests
physical exam
can confirm the symptoms. Signs of Chagas disease may include:
Disease of the heart muscle
Enlarged liver and spleen
Enlarged lymph nodes
Irregular heartbeat
Rapid heartbeat
Tests include:
Blood culture
to look for signs of infection
Chest x-ray
Echocardiogram
(uses sound waves to create pictures of the heart)
Electrocardiogram
(ECG, tests electrical activity in the heart)
Enzyme-linked immunoassay (
ELISA
) to look for signs of infection
Blood smear
to look for signs of infection
Treatment
The acute phase of reactivated Chagas disease should be treated. Infants born with the infection should also be treated.
Treating the chronic phase is recommended for children and most adults. Adults with chronic phase Chagas disease should talk to their health care provider to decide whether treatment is needed.
Two medicines are used to treat this infection: benznidazole and nifurtimox.
Both medicines often have side effects. The side effects may be worse in older people. They may include:
Headaches and dizziness
Loss of appetite and weight loss
Nerve damage
Problems sleeping
Skin rashes
Outlook (Prognosis)
About one third of infected people who are not treated will develop chronic or
symptomatic
Chagas disease. It may take more than 20 years from the time of the original infection to develop heart or digestive problems.
Abnormal heart rhythms may cause sudden death. Once heart failure develops, death usually occurs within several years.
Possible Complications
Chagas disease can cause these complications:
Enlarged colon
Enlarged esophagus with swallowing difficulty
Heart disease
Heart failure
Malnutrition
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider for an appointment if you think you may have Chagas disease.
Prevention
Insect control with insecticides and houses that are less likely to have high insect populations will help control the spread of the disease.
Blood banks in Central and South America screen donors for exposure to the parasite. The blood is discarded if the donor has the parasite. Most blood banks in the United States began screening for Chagas disease in 2007.
Alternative Names
Parasite infection - American trypanosomiasis
Images
Kissing bug
Antibodies
References
Kirchoff LV. Chagas disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 318.
Kirchhoff LV.
Trypanosoma
species (American trypanosomiasis, Chagas' disease): biology of trypanosomes. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 276.
Salvana EMT, Salata RA. American Trypanosomiasis (Chagas Disease;
Trypanosoma cruzi
). In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 333.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Chagas Disease