Isopropanol alcohol poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Isopropanol alcohol poisoning
Isopropanol alcohol poisoning
Isopropanol is a type of alcohol used in some household products, medicines, and cosmetics. It is not meant to be swallowed. Isopropanol poisoning occurs when someone swallows this substance. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Isopropyl alcohol can be harmful if it is swallowed or gets in the eyes.
Where Found
These products may contain isopropanol:
Alcohol swabs
Cleaning supplies
Paint thinners
Perfumes
Rubbing alcohol
Other products may also contain isopropanol.
Symptoms
Symptoms of an isopropanol poisoning include:
Acting or feeling drunk
Slurred speech
Stupor
Uncoordinated movement
Coma
(decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness)
Unconsciousness
Unpaired movements of the eyes
Throat pain
Abdominal pain
Burns and damage to the clear covering of the front of the eye (cornea)
Dizziness
Headache
Low body temperature
Low blood pressure
Low blood sugar
Nausea
and
vomiting
(may contain blood)
Rapid heart rate
Skin redness and pain
Slowed breathing
Urination problems (too much or too little urine)
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or your health care provider tells you to. If the isopropanol is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
If the isopropanol was swallowed, give the person water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. Do not give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting,
seizures
, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in the isopropanol, move them to fresh air right away.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Tube through the nose into the stomach to empty the stomach, if the person took more than one swallow and arrives within 30 to 60 minutes after swallowing it (especially in children)
Dialysis (kidney machine) (in very rare cases)
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a breathing machine (
ventilator
)
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster someone gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Drinking isopropanol will most likely make you very drunk. Recovery is very likely if a person does not swallow a large amount.
However, drinking large amounts can lead to:
Coma and possibly brain damage
Internal bleeding
Breathing difficulty
Kidney failure
It is dangerous to give a child a sponge bath with isopropanol to reduce a fever. Isopropanol is absorbed through the skin, so it can make children very sick.
Alternative Names
Rubbing alcohol poisoning; Isopropyl alcohol poisoning
References
Nelson ME. Toxic alcohols. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 136.
Olives TD, Ling LJ. The alcohols: ethylene glycol, methanol, isopropyl alcohol, and alcohol-related complications. In: Bakes KM, Buchanan JA, Moreira ME, Byyny R, Pons PT, eds.
Emergency Medicine Secrets.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 71.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.