Enteroscopy: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Enteroscopy
Enteroscopy
Enteroscopy is a procedure used to examine the small intestine (small bowel).
How the Test is Performed
An enteroscope uses a long flexible tube with a balloon and a camera attached that can go deep down the inside of the small bowel.
During a single- or double-balloon enteroscopy, balloons attached to the endoscope can be inflated to allow the doctor to view a section of the small intestine. The enteroscope is usually inserted through the mouth for upper enteroscopy.
In a
colonoscopy
, a flexible tube is inserted through your rectum and colon. The tube can most often reach into the end part of the small intestine (ileum). Occasionally, an enteroscope is inserted through the rectum to reach further into the end of the small intestine.
Capsule endoscopy
is done with a disposable capsule that you swallow. This transmits pictures to a recorder and is uploaded to a computer for viewing the pictures.
Tissue samples removed during enteroscopy are sent to the lab for examination. (Biopsies cannot be taken with a capsule endoscopy.)
How to Prepare for the Test
Tell the doctor doing your enteroscopy if you take blood thinners such as warfarin (Coumadin), clopidogrel (Plavix), apixaban (Eliquis), aspirin, or daily NSAIDs because these may interfere with the test. Do not stop taking any medicine unless told to do so by your doctor or health care provider.
Do not eat any solid foods or milk products after midnight on the day of your procedure. You may have clear liquids until 4 hours before your exam.  Occasionally a laxative is given before the enteroscopy. Follow your specific instructions.
You must sign a consent form.
How the Test will Feel
You will be given calming and sedating medicine for the procedure and will not feel any discomfort. You may have some bloating or cramping when you wake up. This is from air that is pumped into the abdomen to expand the area during the procedure.
A capsule endoscopy causes no discomfort.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is most often performed to help diagnose diseases of the small intestine. It may be done if you have:
Abnormal x-ray results
Tumors in the small intestine
Unexplained diarrhea
Unexplained gastrointestinal bleeding
Normal Results
In a normal test result, the doctor will not find sources of bleeding in the small bowel, and will not find any tumors or other abnormal tissue.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal signs during an enteroscopy may include:
Abnormalities of the tissue lining the small intestine (mucosa) or the tiny, finger-like projections on the surface of the small intestine (villi)
Abnormal lengthening of blood vessels (angioectasia) in the intestinal lining
Immune cells called PAS-positive macrophages
Polyps
or cancer
Radiation enteritis
Swollen or enlarged
lymph nodes
or lymphatic vessels
Ulcers
Changes found on enteroscopy may be signs of disorders and conditions, including:
Amyloidosis
Celiac disease
Crohn disease
Folate
or
vitamin B12
deficiency
Giardiasis
Infectious
gastroenteritis
Lymphangiectasia
Lymphoma
Small intestinal angioectasia
Small intestinal cancer
Tropical sprue
Whipple disease
Risks
Complications are rare but may include:
Excessive bleeding from the biopsy site
Hole in the bowel (bowel perforation)
Infection of the biopsy site leading to bacteremia  (bacteria in the bloodstream)
Vomiting, followed by
aspiration
into the lungs
The capsule endoscope can cause a blockage in a narrowed intestine with symptoms of abdominal pain and bloating
Considerations
Factors that prohibit use of this test may include:
Uncooperative or confused person
Untreated blood clotting (coagulation) disorders
Use of medicines that prevent the blood from clotting normally (anticoagulants)
The greatest risk is bleeding. Signs of bleeding include:
Abdominal pain
Blood in the stools
Vomiting blood
Alternative Names
Push enteroscopy; Double-balloon enteroscopy; Single-balloon enteroscopy; Spiral enteroscopy; Capsule enteroscopy
Images
Small intestine biopsy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)
Capsule endoscopy
References
Cameron J. Large bowel. In: Cameron J, ed.
Current Surgical Therapy.
14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:177-286.
Rojas I, Barth B. Capsule endoscopy and small bowel enteroscopy. In:
Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds.
Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.
6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 63.
Sugumar A, Vargo JJ. Preparation for and complications of gastrointestinal
endoscopy. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and
Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier; 2021:chap 42.
Waterman M, Zurad EG, Gralnek IM. Video capsule endoscopy. In: Fowler GC,
ed.
Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care.
4th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 93.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Aria - Jefferson Health Torresdale, Jefferson Digestive Diseases Network, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Diarrhea
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Intestinal Cancer
Small Intestine Disorders