Erythroplasia of Queyrat: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Erythroplasia of Queyrat
Erythroplasia of Queyrat
Erythroplasia of Queyrat is an early form of skin cancer found on the
penis
. The cancer is called squamous cell carcinoma in situ. Squamous cell cancer in situ can occur on any part of the body. This term is used only when the cancer occurs on the penis.
Causes
The condition is most often seen in men who have not been
circumcised
. It is linked to the human papillomavirus (HPV).
Symptoms
The main symptoms are a rash and irritation on the tip or shaft of the penis that persists. The area is most often red and does not respond to topical creams.
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will examine the penis to diagnose the condition and will perform a biopsy to make the diagnosis.
Treatment
Treatment may include:
Skin creams such as imiquimod or 5-fluorouracil. These creams are used for several weeks to months.
Anti-inflammatory (steroid) creams.
If skin creams do not work, your provider may recommend other treatments such as:
Mohs micrographic surgery or other surgical procedures to remove the area
Laser surgery
Freezing the cancer cells (
cryotherapy
)
Scraping away cancer cells and using electricity to kill any that remain (curettage and electrodesiccation)
Outlook (Prognosis)
The prognosis for cure is excellent in most cases.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
You should contact your provider if you have rashes or sores on the genitalia that do not go away.
Images
Male reproductive system
References
Dinuos JGH. Premalignant and malignant nonmelanoma skin tumors. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 21.
James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Epidermal nevi, neoplasms, and cysts. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology.
13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 29.
Mones H. Treatment of noncervical condylomata acuminata. In: Fowler GC, ed.
Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care.
4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 138.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Penis Disorders