Birth control pill overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Birth control pill overdose
Birth control pill overdose
Birth control pills, also called oral contraceptives, are prescription medicines used to prevent pregnancy. Birth control pill overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual
overdose
. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Most birth control pills contain one of the following combinations of estrogen and progestin hormones:
Ethynodiol diacetate and ethinyl estradiol
Ethynodiol diacetate and mestranol
Levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol
Norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol
Norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol
Mestranol and norethindrone
Mestranol and norethynodrel
Norgestrel and ethinyl estradiol
These birth control pills contain progestin only:
Norethindrone
Norgestrel
Other birth control pills may also contain these ingredients.
Where Found
Here are several birth control medicines:
Levonorgestrel
Levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol
Norethindrone
Norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol
Norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol
Other birth control pills may also be available.
Symptoms
Symptoms of an overdose of birth control pills include:
Breast tenderness
Discolored urine
Drowsiness
Heavy vaginal bleeding (2 to 7 days after the overdose)
Headache
Emotional changes
Nausea and vomiting
Rash
Home Care
Seek medical help right away, and call poison control. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Stop using the birth control pills and use other methods to prevent pregnancy, if desired. The overdose is not likely to be life-threatening.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the medicine (ingredients and strength, if known)
When it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your
local poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
A trip to the emergency room (ER) will probably not be necessary. If you do go, take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
If an ER visit is needed, the provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
The person may have blood and urine tests, and may receive:
Activated charcoal (in extreme cases)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
Serious symptoms are very unlikely. Birth control pills may affect the metabolism of other medicines, which can result in other, more serious symptoms or side effects.
Images
Birth control pill  - series
References
Aronson JK. Hormonal contraceptives - emergency contraception. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:824-826.
Aronson JK. Hormonal contraceptives - oral. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:782-823.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Birth Control