Smashed fingers: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Smashed fingers
Smashed fingers
Smashed fingers is an injury involving trauma to one or more fingers.
Considerations
If an injury to a finger occurs at the tip and does not involve the joint or nail bed, you may not need the help of a health care provider. If only the tip of your finger bone is broken, your provider may not even recommend a splint.
Causes
Fingers can be smashed by a hammer blow, car door, desk drawer, baseball, or some other force.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Difficulty moving the tip of the finger
Discoloration or bruising of the finger or fingernail
Finger pain
Loss of fingernail
Swelling
First Aid
Apply an ice pack to decrease swelling.  Be sure to wrap the pack in a clean cloth first to prevent cold injury to the skin.
Over-the-counter pain medicines may help relieve discomfort.
If pain becomes severe, with blood under the fingernail, call your provider. Your provider may guide you in taking measures to relieve the pressure and blood, and prevent the fingernail from falling off.
DO NOT
Do not splint a smashed finger without first consulting your provider.
Do not drain blood from under the fingernail unless your provider instructs you to do so.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Seek medical attention right away for any of the following:
The finger is bent and you can't straighten it.
The skin is cut open and bone is exposed.
You are unable to move or feel the tip of your finger.
The injury involves the palm or any of the joints, such as a finger or the wrist.
Prevention
Teach safety to young children. Use caution when shutting doors to make sure fingers are not in danger.
Alternative Names
Finger(s) - smashed; Crushed digits
Images
Smashed fingers
References
Kamal RN, Gire JD. Tendon injuries in the hand. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.
DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine: Principles and Practice
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 73.
Schoener B, Wagner MJ. Hand injuries. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 42.
Review Date 4/24/2023
Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Finger Injuries and Disorders