Cranial mononeuropathy III - diabetic type: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Cranial mononeuropathy III - diabetic type
Cranial mononeuropathy III - diabetic type
This diabetic type of cranial mononeuropathy III is a complication of
diabetes
. It  causes double vision and
eyelid drooping
.
Causes
Mononeuropathy
means that only one nerve is damaged. This disorder affects the third cranial nerve in the skull. This is one of the cranial nerves that control eye movement and the pupil of the eye.
This type of damage may occur along with
diabetic peripheral neuropathy
. Cranial mononeuropathy III is the most common cranial nerve disorder in people with diabetes. It is due to damage to the small blood vessels that feed the nerve.
Cranial mononeuropathy III
can also occur in people who don't have diabetes.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Double vision
Drooping of one eyelid (ptosis)
Pain around the eye and forehead
Change in size of the pupil (
anisocoria
)
Neuropathy often develops within 7 days of onset of pain.
Exams and Tests
An exam of the eyes will determine whether only the third nerve is affected or if other nerves have also been damaged. Signs may include:
Eyes that are not aligned
Pupil reaction that is often normal
Your health care provider will do a complete exam to determine the possible effect on other parts of the nervous system. Depending on the suspected cause, you may need:
Blood tests
Tests to look at blood vessels in the brain (
cerebral angiogram
, CT angiogram,
MR angiogram
)
MRI
or
CT scan of the brain
Spinal tap (
lumbar puncture
)
You may need to be referred to a doctor who specializes in vision problems related to the nerves in the eye (neuro-ophthalmologist).
Treatment
There is no specific treatment to correct the nerve injury.
Treatments to help symptoms may include:
Close
control of blood sugar level
Eye patch or glasses with prisms to reduce double vision
Pain medicines
Antiplatelet therapy
Surgery to correct eyelid drooping or eyes that are not aligned
Some people may recover without treatment.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The prognosis is good. Many people get better over 3 to 6 months. However, some people have permanent eye muscle weakness.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Permanent eyelid drooping
Permanent vision changes
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have double vision and it does not go away in a few minutes, especially if you also have eyelid drooping.
Prevention
Controlling your blood sugar level may reduce the risk of developing this disorder.
Alternative Names
Diabetic third nerve palsy; Pupil-sparing third cranial nerve palsy; Ocular diabetic neuropathy
Images
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
References
Brownlee M, Aiello LP, Sun JK, et al. Complications of diabetes mellitus. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 38.
Rucker JC, Seay MD. Cranial neuropathies. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 103.
Tamhankar MA. Eye movement disorders: third, fourth, and sixth nerve palsies and other causes of diplopia and ocular misalignment. In: Liu GT, Volpe NJ, Galetta SL, eds.
Liu, Volpe, and Galetta's Neuro-Ophthalmology
. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 15.
Thurtell MJ, Rucker JC. Neuro-ophthalmology. In: Winn HR, ed.
Youmans and Winn Neurological Surgery
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 15.
Review Date 6/13/2024
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Diabetic Nerve Problems