Osmolality urine test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Osmolality urine test
Osmolality urine test
The osmolality urine test measures the concentration of chemicals in urine.
Osmolality in the blood can be measured using a
blood test
.
How the Test is Performed
clean-catch urine sample
is needed. The clean-catch method is used to prevent germs from the penis or vagina from getting into a urine sample. To collect your urine, your health care provider may give you a special clean-catch kit that contains a cleansing solution and sterile wipes. Follow instructions exactly.
How to Prepare for the Test
Your provider may tell you that you need to limit your fluid intake 12 to 14 hours before the test.
Your provider will ask you to temporarily stop taking any medicines that may affect the test results. Be sure to tell your provider about all the medicines you take, including dextran and sucrose. Do not stop taking any medicine before talking to your provider.
Other things can also affect the test results. Tell your provider if you recently:
Had any type of anesthesia for an operation.
Received  intravenous dye (contrast medium) for an imaging test such as a
CT scan
or
MRI
.
Used herbs or natural remedies, especially Chinese herbs.
How the Test will Feel
The test involves normal urination. There is no discomfort.
Why the Test is Performed
This test helps check your body's water balance and urine concentration.
Urine osmolality is a more exact measurement of urine concentration than the
urine specific gravity
test.
Normal Results
Normal values are as follows:
Random specimen: 50 to 1200 mOsm/kg (50 to 1200 mmol/kg)
12 to 14 hour fluid restriction: Greater than 850 mOsm/kg (850 mmol/kg)
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results are indicated as follows:
Higher than normal osmolality may indicate:
Adrenal glands do not produce enough hormones (
Addison disease
or other types of adrenal insufficiency)
Glucose (a type of sugar) in the urine
Heart failure
High sodium level in the blood
Loss of body fluids
(dehydration)
Narrowing of the kidney artery (renal artery stenosis)
Shock
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (
SIADH
)
Lower than normal osmolality may indicate:
Damage to kidney tubule cells (
renal tubular necrosis
)
Diabetes insipidus
Drinking too much fluid
Kidney failure
Low sodium level in the blood
Severe kidney infection (pyelonephritis)
Risks
There are no risks with this test.
Images
Osmolality test
Female urinary tract
Male urinary tract
Osmolality urine - series
References
Kashkouli A, Berl T, Sands JM. Disorders of water metabolism. In: Johnson RJ, Floege J, Tonelli M, eds.
Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 9.
Oh MS, Briefel G, Pincus MR. Evaluation of renal function, water, electrolytes, and acid-base balance. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 15.
Review Date 8/20/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Fluid and Electrolyte Balance
Urine and Urination