Drain cleaner poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Drain cleaner poisoning
Drain cleaner poisoning
Drain cleaners contain very dangerous chemicals that can be harmful to your health if you swallow them, breathe them in (inhale), or if they come in contact with your skin and eyes.
This article discusses poisoning from swallowing or breathing in drain cleaner.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Sodium hydroxide
Where Found
This poison is found in:
Some drain cleaners
Some aquarium products
Note: This list may not be all-inclusive.
Symptoms
Symptoms of drain cleaner poisoning include:
Abdominal pain
(severe)
Breathing difficulty due to throat
swelling
Burns of the mouth and throat
Chest pain
Collapse
Diarrhea
Drooling
Loss of vision if the poison touched the eyes
Mouth pain (severe)
Rapid drop in blood pressure (
shock
)
Throat pain (severe)
Severe burns and tissue damage
Vomiting
, often bloody
Symptoms from getting sodium hydroxide on the skin or in the eyes include:
Burning
Severe pain
Vision loss
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional.
If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. DO NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow.
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with at least 2 quarts (1.9 liters) for at least 15 minutes.
DO NOT give vinegar or lemon juice, as this may cause more severe burning.
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator)
Blood and urine tests
Camera down the throat (endoscopy) to see burns in the food pipe (esophagus) and stomach
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG), or heart tracing
Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Activated charcoal, which is used to treat other types of poisoning, does not effectively treat sodium hydroxide poisoning.
For skin exposure, treatment may include:
Surgical removal of burned skin (debridement)
Transfer to a hospital that specializes in burn care
Washing of the skin (irrigation), possibly every few hours for several days
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Swallowing this type of poison can have severe effects on many parts of the body. Damage to the esophagus and stomach continues to occur for several weeks after the sodium hydroxide was swallowed. Death may occur up to several months later from additional complications. Holes (perforations) in the esophagus and stomach may cause serious infections in the inside spaces of the chest and abdomen, which may lead to death. Surgery may be needed if the chemical has perforated the esophagus, stomach, or intestine.
References
Hoyte C. Caustics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 143.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Household Products
Poisoning