Thiazide overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Thiazide overdose
Thiazide overdose
Thiazides are medicines used to treat high blood pressure. Thiazide overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This is article for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Thiazides are a type of medicine called a diuretic. They prevent the body from reabsorbing sodium (salt) from the kidneys. Thiazides and diuretics like them are mostly used to treat high blood pressure and fluid retention that causes swelling.
Where Found
Thiazides include these medicines:
Bendroflumethiazide
Chlorothiazide
Chlorthalidone
Hydrochlorothiazide
Hydroflumethiazide
Indapamide
Methyclothiazide
Metolazone
Other medicines may also contain thiazide.
Symptoms
Symptoms of a thiazide overdose include:
Confusion
Dizziness,
fainting
Drowsiness
Dry mouth
Fever
Frequent urination, pale-colored urine
Heart rhythm problems
Low blood pressure
Muscle cramps
and twitching
Nausea, vomiting
Rash
Seizures (convulsions)
Skin sensitive to sunlight, yellow skin
Slow breathing
Vision problems (things you see look yellow)
Weakness
Coma
(unresponsiveness)
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the medicine (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison control. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Treatment may include:
Activated charcoal
Breathing support, which may include oxygen or a ventilator (tube through the mouth into the lungs and breathing machine)
Intravenous fluids (IV, given through a vein)
Laxative
Medicine to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on how severe the symptoms are. Heart rhythm problems can be life threatening. People usually recover well. Serious symptoms and death are unlikely.
Alternative Names
Diuretic anti-hypertensives overdose
References
Aronson JK. Diuretics. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:1030-1053.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Blood Pressure Medicines