Paint, lacquer, and varnish remover poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Paint, lacquer, and varnish remover poisoning
Paint, lacquer, and varnish remover poisoning
This article discusses the harmful effects from swallowing or breathing in (sniffing) products to remove paint,
lacquer
, or
varnish
.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Paint, lacquer, and varnish removers may contain the following poisonous ingredients:
Benzyl alcohol
Ethanol
Formic acid
Methyl alcohol
Methylene hydrochloride
Naphtha
Xylene
Where Found
Paint, lacquer, and varnish removers are sold under various brand names.
Symptoms
Paint lacquer and varnish remover poisoning can cause symptoms in various parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Blood in the lungs or coughing blood
Breathing difficulty
(from inhalation)
Fluid in the lungs
Throat swelling (may also cause breathing difficulty)
Rapid, shallow breathing
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Severe pain in the throat
Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue
Vision loss
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Abdominal pain
-- severe
Bloody stools
Burns of the esophagus (food pipe)
Vomiting
, possibly with blood
KIDNEY
Kidney failure
HEART AND BLOOD
Collapse
Low blood pressure -- develops rapidly (
shock
)
Severe change in the level of acid in the blood (pH balance) -- leads to the failure of many organs
SKIN
Burns
Irritation
Necrosis (holes) in the skin or underlying tissues
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Coma
(decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness)
Confusion
Convulsions
(seizures)
Dizziness
(from sniffing)
Feeling of being drunk (euphoria)
Incoordination
Unsteadiness
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider.
If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a poison control or a provider.
If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move them to fresh air.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen through a tube into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator)
Bronchoscopy
-- camera down the throat to look for burns in the airways and lungs (if the poison was aspirated)
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Endoscopy
-- camera down the throat to look for burns in the esophagus and the stomach
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicine (antidote) to reverse the effect of the poison and treat symptoms
Surgical removal of burned skin (skin debridement)
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to aspirate (suck out) the stomach. This is done only when the person gets medical care within 30 to 45 minutes of the poisoning, and a very large amount of the substance has been swallowed
Washing of the skin (irrigation) -- perhaps every few hours for several days
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Swallowing such poisons can have severe effects on many parts of the body. Burns in the airway or gastrointestinal tract can lead to tissue death. This may result in infection, shock, and death, even several months after substance was swallowed. Scar tissue in the affected areas can lead to long-term problems with breathing, swallowing, and digestion.
Alternative Names
Paint remover poisoning
References
Hamm LL, DuBose TD. Disorders of acid-base balance. In: Yu ASL, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Taal MW, eds.
Brenner and Rector's The Kidney
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 16.
Hoyte C. Caustics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 143.
Nelson ME. Toxic alcohols. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 136.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.