Caterpillars: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Caterpillars
Caterpillars
Caterpillars are the larvae (immature forms) of butterflies and moths. There are many thousands of types, with a huge variety of colors and sizes. They look like worms and are covered in small hairs. Most are harmless, but some can cause allergic reactions, especially if your eyes, skin, or lungs come in contact with their hairs, or if you eat them.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage symptoms from exposure to caterpillars. If you or someone you are with is exposed, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of exposure to caterpillar hairs in different parts of the body.
EYES, MOUTH, NOSE AND THROAT
Drooling
Pain
Redness
Inflamed membranes in the nose
Increased tears
Mouth and throat burning and swelling
Pain
Redness of the eye
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Headache
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Cough
Shortness of breath
Wheezing
SKIN
Blisters
Hives
Itching
Rash
Redness
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Vomiting, if caterpillar or caterpillar hairs are eaten
WHOLE BODY
Pain
Severe allergic reaction (
anaphylaxis
). This is rare.
A combination of symptoms including itching, nausea, headache, fever, vomiting, muscle spasms, tingling in the skin, and swollen glands. This is also rare.
Home Care
Remove irritating caterpillar hairs. If the caterpillar was on your skin, put sticky tape (such as duct or masking tape) where the hairs are, then pull it off. Repeat until all hairs are removed. Wash the contact area with soap and water, and then ice. Place the ice (wrapped in a clean cloth) on the affected area for 10 minutes and then off for 10 minutes. Repeat this process. If the person has blood flow problems, decrease the time ice is used to prevent possible damage to the skin. After several ice treatments, apply a paste of baking soda and water to the area.
If the caterpillar touched your eyes, flush your eyes right away with plenty of water, and then get medical help.
Get medical care if you breathe in caterpillar hairs.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Type of caterpillar, if known
Time of the incident
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Bring the caterpillar to the hospital, if possible. Make sure it is in a secure container.
The health care provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. You may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen; breathing tube through the mouth and breathing machine in serious allergic reactions
Eye examination and numbing eye drops
Eye flushing with water or saline
Medicines to control pain, itching, and allergic reactions
Skin examination to remove all caterpillar hairs
In more serious reactions, intravenous fluids (fluids through a vein), x-rays, and ECG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing) may be necessary.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The faster you get medical help, the faster your symptoms will go away. Most people do not have lasting problems from exposure to caterpillars.
References
Curtis AM, Erickson TB. Venomous animal injuries. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 53.
Erickson TB, Marquez A. Arthropod envenomation and parasitism. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 41.
James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Parasitic infestations, stings, and bites. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology
. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 20.
Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Infestations, bites, and stings. In: Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds.
Paller and Mancini - Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology: A Textbook of Skin Disorders of Childhood and Adolescence
. 6th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 18.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Insect Bites and Stings