Wart remover poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Wart remover poisoning
Wart remover poisoning
Wart removers are medicines used to get rid of
warts
. Warts are small growths on the skin that are caused by a virus. They are usually painless. Wart remover poisoning occurs when someone swallows or applies more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. Do NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911) or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national, toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
The poisonous ingredients include:
Salicylates
Other acids
Where Found
Ingredients in wart remover medicines that can be poisonous are found in many products, such as:
Clear Away
Clear Away Plantar
Compound W
DuoFilm
DuoFilm patch
DuoPlant for Feet
Freezone
Gordofilm
Hydrisalic
Keralyt
Wart-Off Freeze
Mediplast
Mosco
Occlusal
Occlusal-HP
Off-Ezy Wart Remover
Salactic Film
Trans-Ver-Sal
Wart Remover
Other products may also contain salicylates and other acids.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of wart remover poisoning in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
No breathing
Rapid breathing
Shallow breathing
Fluid in the lungs
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Eye irritation
Loss of vision
Ringing in the ears (tinnitus)
Thirst
Throat burning and swelling
KIDNEYS
Kidney failure
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Collapse
Convulsions
(seizures)
Dizziness
Drowsiness
Fever
Hallucinations
Hyperactivity
SKIN
Rash (usually an allergic reaction)
Mild burn (from very high amounts on the skin)
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting, possibly with blood
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so. Flush the eyes with water and remove any medicine that remains on the skin.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national, toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
Your provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
If the medicine was swallowed, tests may include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain for neurologic symptoms
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Activated charcoal
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Laxative
Medicines to treat symptoms
Kidney dialysis (machine) may be needed if serious kidney damage has occurred.
If the poisoning is from skin exposure, the person may receive:
Washing (irrigation) of the skin, perhaps every few hours for several days
Antibiotic ointment (after skin irrigation)
Surgery to remove burned skin (debridement)
If the poisoning is from eye exposure, the person may receive:
Eye irrigation (washing)
Application of eyedrops
Vomiting of blood is a sign of bleeding in the stomach or intestines. A procedure called an endoscopy may be needed to stop the bleeding. In an endoscopy, a tube is placed through the mouth into the stomach and upper intestine.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on how much poison entered the blood and how quickly treatment was received. People can recover if the effect of the poison can be stopped. Kidney damage can be permanent.
Images
Warts - flat on the cheek and neck
Wart (close-up)
Wart removal
References
Aronson JK. Salicylates, topical. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:293.
Hatten BW. Aspirin and nonsteroidal agents. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 139.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.