Low calcium level  - infants: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Low calcium level  - infants
Low calcium level  - infants
Calcium
is a mineral in the body. It is needed for strong bones and teeth. Calcium also helps the heart, nerves, muscles, and other body systems work well.
A low blood calcium level is called hypocalcemia. This article discusses low blood calcium level in infants. Hypocalcemia can occur at any age.
Causes
A healthy baby most often has very careful control of the blood calcium level by normal bodily systems.
A low calcium level in the blood is more likely to occur in newborns, more commonly in those who were born too early (preemies). Common causes of hypocalcemia in a newborn include:
Certain medicines
Diabetes in the birth mother
Episodes of very low oxygen levels
Infection
Stress caused by serious illness
There are also some rare illnesses that can lead to low blood calcium level. These include:
DiGeorge syndrome, a genetic disorder.
The parathyroid glands help control calcium use and removal by the body. Rarely, a child is born with underactive parathyroid glands.
Symptoms
Babies with hypocalcemia often have no symptoms. Sometimes, babies with low blood calcium levels are jittery or have tremors or twitching. Rarely, they have
seizures
.
These babies may also have a slow heart rate and low blood pressure.
Exams and Tests
The diagnosis is most often made when a blood test shows that the infant's blood calcium level is low.
Treatment
The baby may get extra calcium, if needed.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Problems with a low blood calcium level in newborns or premature infants most often do not continue for a long term.
Alternative Names
Hypocalcemia - infants
Images
Hypocalcemia
References
Doyle DA. Hormones and peptides of calcium homeostasis and bone metabolism. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 588.
Escobar O, Gurtunca N, Viswanathan P, Witchel SF. Pediatric endocrinology. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, Garrison J, eds.
Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 9.
Review Date 11/6/2023
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Calcium
Uncommon Infant and Newborn Problems