Wine and heart health: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Wine and heart health
Wine and heart health
Some studies have shown that adults who drink light to moderate amounts of alcohol may be less likely to develop heart disease than those who do not drink at all or are heavy drinkers. However, people who do not drink alcohol should not start just because they want to avoid developing heart disease. In fact, drinking too much alcohol can be bad for your heart health.
Information
There is a fine line between healthy drinking and
risky drinking
. Do not begin drinking or drink more often just to lower your risk of heart disease. Heavier drinking can harm the heart and liver. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in people who drink too much alcohol.
Health care providers recommend that if you drink alcohol, drink only light to moderate amounts:
For men, limit alcohol to 1 to 2 drinks a day.
For women, limit alcohol to 1 drink a day.
One drink is defined as:
5 ounces (150 milliliters, mL) of wine
12 ounces (360 mL) of beer
1 1/2 ounces (45 mL) of 80-proof spirits
There are much more effective ways to prevent heart disease, including:
Controlling blood pressure
and
cholesterol
Getting at least 150 minutes (2.5 hours) of exercise every week
Following a healthy diet with a variety of vegetables and fruits, whole grains, lean proteins, healthy oils, little to no added sugar and sodium, and little or no alcohol
Not smoking
Maintaining an ideal weight
Anyone who has heart disease or heart failure should talk to their provider before drinking alcohol. Alcohol can make heart failure and other heart problems worse.
Alternative Names
Health and wine; Wine and heart disease; Preventing heart disease - wine; Preventing heart disease - alcohol
Images
Wine and health
References
American Heart Association website. The American Heart Association diet and lifestyle recommendations.
www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-eating/eat-smart/nutrition-basics/aha-diet-and-lifestyle-recommendations
. Updated November 1, 2021. Accessed June 12, 2024.
Kloner RA, Rezkalla S. Cardiomyopathies induced by drugs or toxins. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 84.
Mozaffarian D. Nutrition and cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
.12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 29.
Snetselaar LG, de Jesus JM, DeSilva DM, Stoody EE. Dietary guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025: understanding the scientific process, guidelines, and key recommendations.
Nutr Today
. 2021;56(6):287-295. PMID: 34987271
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34987271/
.
Review Date 4/18/2024
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Alcohol