HPV vaccine: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
HPV vaccine
HPV vaccine
The human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccine
protects against infection by certain strains of HPV. HPV can cause
cervical cancer
and
genital warts
.
HPV has also been linked to other kinds of cancers, including vaginal, vulvar, penile, anal, mouth, and throat cancers.
Information
HPV is a common virus that is spread through sexual contact. There are several types of HPV. Many types don't cause problems. However, some types of HPV can cause cancers of the:
Cervix, vagina, and vulva in women
Penis in men
Anus in women and men
Back of the throat in women and men
The HPV vaccine protects against the types of HPV that cause most cases of cervical cancer. Other less common types of HPV can also cause cervical cancer.
The vaccine does not treat cervical cancer.
WHO SHOULD GET THIS VACCINE
The HPV vaccine is recommended for boys and girls 9 through 14 years old. The vaccine is also recommended for people up to 26 years old who haven't already gotten the vaccine or finished the series of shots.
Certain people age 27 to 45 years may be candidates for the vaccine. Talk to your health care provider if you think you are a candidate in this age group.
The vaccine can offer protection against HPV-related cancers in any age group. Certain people who may have new sexual contacts in the future and could be exposed to HPV should also consider the vaccine.
HPV vaccine is given as a 2-dose series to boys and girls 9 through 14 years old:
First dose: now
Second dose: 6 to 12 months after the first dose
The vaccine is given as a 3-dose series to people 15 through 26 years old, and to those who have weakened immune systems:
First dose: now
Second dose: 1 to 2 months after the first dose
Third dose: 6 months after the first dose
Pregnant women should not receive this vaccine. However, there have been no problems found in women who received the vaccine during pregnancy before they knew they were pregnant.
WHAT ELSE TO THINK ABOUT
The HPV vaccine does not protect against all types of HPV that can lead to cervical cancer. Girls and women should still receive regular cervical cancer screening to detect infection with the HPV virus, or precancerous cervical changes and early signs of cervical cancer.
The HPV vaccine does not protect against other infections that can be spread during sexual contact.
Talk to your provider if:
You are not sure whether you or your child should receive the HPV vaccine
You or your child develops complications or severe symptoms after getting an HPV vaccine
You have other questions or concerns about the HPV vaccine
Alternative Names
Vaccine - HPV; Immunization - HPV; Gardasil; HPV2; HPV4; Vaccine to prevent cervical cancer; Genital warts - HPV vaccine; Cervical dysplasia - HPV vaccine; Cervical cancer - HPV vaccine; Cancer of the cervix - HPV vaccine; Abnormal Pap smear - HPV vaccine; Vaccination - HPV vaccine
Images
Vaccines
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. HPV VIS.
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/current-vis/hpv.html
. Updated August 6, 2021. Accessed March 10, 2025.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Vaccines & Immunizations. Adult immunization schedule by age (Addendum updated November 21, 2024.).
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/imz-schedules/adult-age.html
. Updated November 21, 2024. Accessed March 14, 2025.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Vaccine schedules for you and your family.
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/imz-schedules/
. Updated November 22, 2024. Accessed March 10, 2025.
The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology website. Human papillomavirus vaccination.
www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2020/08/human-papillomavirus-vaccination
. Reaffirmed 2023. Accessed March 10, 2025.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 01/29/2025.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
HPV