Abdominal exploration: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Abdominal exploration
Abdominal exploration
Abdominal exploration is surgery to look at the organs and structures in your belly area (abdomen). This includes your:
Appendix
Bladder
Gallbladder
Intestines
Kidney and ureters
Liver
Pancreas
Spleen
Stomach
Uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries (in women)
Surgery that opens the abdomen is called a laparotomy.
Description
Exploratory laparotomy is done while you are under general anesthesia. This means you are asleep and feel no pain.
Your surgeon makes a cut into the abdomen and examines the abdominal organs. The size and location of the surgical cut depend on the specific health concern.
biopsy
can be taken during the procedure.
Laparoscopy
describes a procedure that is performed with a tiny camera placed inside the abdomen. If possible, laparoscopy will be done instead of laparotomy.
Why the Procedure is Performed
Your health care provider may recommend a laparotomy if imaging tests of the abdomen, such as
x-rays
and
CT scans
, have not provided an accurate diagnosis.
Exploratory laparotomy may be used to help diagnose and treat many health conditions, including:
Cancer
of the ovary, colon, pancreas, liver
Endometriosis
Gallstones
Hole in the intestine (intestinal perforation)
Acute appendicitis
Diverticulitis
Acute
or
chronic pancreatitis
Liver abscess
Pockets of infection (retroperitoneal abscess,
abdominal abscess
, pelvic abscess)
Pregnancy outside of the uterus (
ectopic pregnancy
)
Scar tissue in the abdomen (
adhesions
)
Risks
Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general include:
Reactions to medicines
Breathing problems
Bleeding, blood clots, infection
Risks of this surgery include:
Incisional
hernia
Damage to organs in the abdomen
Before the Procedure
You will visit with your provider and have medical tests before your surgery. Your provider will:
Do a complete physical exam.
Make sure other medical conditions you may have, such as diabetes or
high blood pressure
, are under control.
Perform tests to make sure that you will be able to tolerate the surgery.
If you are a smoker, you should
stop smoking
several weeks before your surgery. Ask your provider for help.
Tell your surgeon or nurse if:
You are or could be pregnant
You are taking any medicines, including drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription
During the week before your surgery:
You may be asked to temporarily stop taking medicines that keep your blood from clotting. These medicines are called blood thinners. This includes over-the-counter medicines and supplements such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and vitamin E. Many prescription medicines are also blood thinners.
Ask your surgeon which medicines you should still take on the day of surgery.
On the day of surgery:
Follow instructions about when to stop eating and drinking.
Take the medicines your surgeon told you to take with a small sip of water.
Arrive at the hospital on time.
Outlook (Prognosis)
You should be able to start eating and drinking normally about 2 to 3 days after the surgery. How long you stay in the hospital depends on the severity of the problem. Complete recovery usually takes about 4 to 6 weeks.
Alternative Names
Exploratory surgery; Laparotomy; Exploratory laparotomy
Images
Digestive system
Pelvic adhesions
Abdominal exploration  - series
References
Landmann A, Bonds M, Postier R. Acute abdomen. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery
. 21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 46.
Young S, Tsai S. Management of periampullary cancer. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds.
Current Surgical Therapy
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:589-599.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, General Surgery Practice Specializing in Breast Cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Adhesions
Appendicitis
Colorectal Cancer
Diverticulosis and Diverticulitis
Endometriosis
Gallstones
Liver Cancer
Ovarian Cancer
Pancreatic Cancer
Peritoneal Disorders