Lung diffusion testing: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Lung diffusion testing
Lung diffusion testing
Lung diffusion testing measures how well the lungs exchange gases. This is an important part of
lung testing
, because the major function of the lungs is to allow oxygen to diffuse or pass into the blood from the lungs, and to allow carbon dioxide to diffuse from the blood into the lungs.
How the Test is Performed
You breathe in (inhale) air containing a very small amount of
carbon monoxide
and a tracer gas, such as methane or helium. You hold your breath for 10 seconds, then rapidly blow it out (exhale). The exhaled gas is tested to determine how much of the tracer gas was absorbed during the breath.
How to Prepare for the Test
Before taking this test:
Do not eat a heavy meal before the test.
Do not smoke for at least 4 to 6 hours before the test.
If you use a bronchodilator or other inhaled medicines, ask your health care provider whether or not you can use them before the test.
How the Test will Feel
The mouthpiece fits tightly around your mouth. Clips are put on your nose.
Why the Test is Performed
The test is used to diagnose certain lung diseases, and to monitor the status of people with established lung disease. Repeatedly measuring the diffusing capacity can help determine whether the disease is improving or getting worse.
Normal Results
Normal test results depend on a person's:
Age
Sex
Height
Hemoglobin (the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen) level
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results mean that gases do not move normally across the lung tissues into the blood vessels of the lung. This may be due to lung diseases such as:
COPD
Interstitial fibrosis
Pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary hypertension
Sarcoidosis
Bleeding in the lung
Asthma
Reduced lung volume (capacity)
Risks
There are no significant risks.
Considerations
Other
pulmonary function tests
may be done together with this test.
Alternative Names
Diffusing capacity; DLCO test
Images
Lung diffusion testing
References
Bhakta NR, Kaminsky DA. Pulmonary function testing: Physiologic and technical principles. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 31.
Scanlon PD, Niven AS. Respiratory testing and function. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 73.
Review Date 11/25/2023
Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron Jr. Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Emphysema
Lung Diseases
Pulmonary Fibrosis
Pulmonary Hypertension
Sarcoidosis