Sutures - separated: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Sutures - separated
Sutures - separated
Separated sutures are abnormally wide spaces in the bony joints of the skull in an infant.
Considerations
The skull is made up of many bones. There are 8 bones in the skull itself and 14 bones in the face area. They join together to form a solid, bony cavity that protects and supports the brain. The areas where the bones join together are called the sutures.
In an infant only a few minutes old, the pressure from delivery may compress the head. This makes the bony plates overlap at the sutures and creates a small ridge. This is normal in newborns. In the next few days, the baby's head expands. The overlap disappears and the edges of the bony plates meet edge-to-edge. This is the normal position.
Diseases or conditions that cause an abnormal increase in the pressure within the head can cause the sutures to spread apart. These separated sutures can be a sign of pressure within the skull (
increased intracranial pressure
).
Separated sutures may be associated with
bulging fontanelles
. If intracranial pressure is increased a lot, there may be large veins over the scalp.
Causes
The problem may be caused by:
Arnold-Chiari malformation
Battered child syndrome
Bleeding inside the brain (intraventricular hemorrhage)
Brain tumor
Dandy-Walker malformation
Down syndrome
Hydrocephalus
Infections that are present at birth (congenital infections)
Lead poisoning
Meningitis
Subdural hematoma
or
subdural effusion
Underactive thyroid gland (
hypothyroidism
)
Vitamin deficiencies
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if your child has:
Separated sutures,
bulging fontanelles
, or very obvious scalp veins
Redness, swelling, or discharge from the area of the sutures
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The provider will perform a physical exam. This will include examining the fontanelles and scalp veins and feeling (palpating) the sutures to find out how far they are separated.
The provider will ask questions about the child's medical history and symptoms, including:
Does the child have other symptoms (such as abnormal
head circumference
)?
When did you first notice the separated sutures?
Does it seem to be getting worse?
Is the child otherwise well? (For example, are eating and activity patterns normal?)
The following tests may be performed:
MRI of the head
CT scan of the head
Ultrasound
of the head
Infectious disease work-up, including
blood cultures
and possible
spinal tap
Metabolic work-up, such as blood tests to look at
electrolyte
levels
Standard eye exam
Although your provider keeps records from routine checkups, you might find it helpful to keep your own records of your child's development. Bring these records to your provider's attention if you notice anything unusual.
Alternative Names
Separation of the sutures
Images
Skull of a newborn
References
Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW. Head and neck. In: Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW, eds.
Seidel's Guide to Physical Examination.
10th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2023:chap 11.
Parga-Belinkie JJ. The newborn infant. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 115.
Rosenberg GA. Brain edema and disorders of cerebrospinal fluid circulation. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 88.
Review Date 1/17/2025
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Brain Malformations