Adhesion: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Adhesion
Adhesion
Adhesions are bands of scar-like tissue that form between  two surfaces inside the body and cause them to stick together.
Causes
With movement of the body, internal organs such as the bowel or uterus are normally able to shift and to slide past each other. This is because these tissues and organs in the abdominal cavity have smooth, slippery surfaces. Inflammation (swelling), surgery, or injury can cause adhesions to form and prevent this movement. Adhesions can occur almost anywhere in the body, including:
Joints, such as the shoulder
Eyes
Inside the abdomen or pelvis
Adhesions can become larger or tighter over time. Problems may occur if the adhesions cause an organ or body part to:
Twist
Pull out of position
Be unable to move normally
The risk of forming adhesions is high after bowel or female organ surgeries. Surgery using a laparoscope is less likely to cause adhesions than open surgery.
Other causes of adhesions in the abdomen or pelvis include:
Appendicitis
, most often when the appendix breaks open (ruptures)
Cancer
Endometriosis
Infections in the abdomen and pelvis, such as appendicitis or fallopian tube infection
Radiation treatment
Adhesions around the joints may occur:
After surgery or trauma
With certain types of arthritis
With overuse of a joint or tendon
Symptoms
Adhesions in joints, tendons, or ligaments make it harder to move the joint. They may also cause pain.
Adhesions in the belly (abdomen) may cause a
blockage of the intestines
. Symptoms include:
Bloating or swelling of your belly
Constipation
Nausea and vomiting
No longer being able to pass gas
Pain in the belly that is severe and crampy
Adhesions in the pelvis may cause long-term (chronic) pelvic pain.
Exams and Tests
Most of the time, the adhesions cannot be seen using x-rays or imaging tests.
Hysterosalpingography
may help detect adhesions inside the uterus or fallopian tubes.
X-rays of the abdomen, barium contrast studies, and CT scans may help detect a blockage of the intestines caused by adhesions.
Endoscopy (a way of looking inside the body using a flexible tube that has a small camera on the end) may help diagnose adhesions:
Hysteroscopy looks inside the uterus
Laparoscopy
looks inside the abdomen and pelvis
Treatment
Surgery may be done to separate the adhesions. This can let the organ regain normal movement and reduce symptoms. However, the risk for more adhesions goes up with more surgeries.
Depending on the location of the adhesions, a barrier may be placed at the time of surgery to help reduce the chance of the adhesions returning.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome is good in most cases.
Possible Complications
Adhesions can cause various disorders, depending on the tissues affected.
In the eye, adhesion of the iris to the lens can lead to
glaucoma
.
In the intestines, adhesions can cause partial or complete
bowel obstruction
.
Adhesions inside the uterine cavity can cause a condition called
Asherman syndrome
. This can cause a woman to have irregular menstrual cycles and be unable to get pregnant.
Pelvic adhesions that involve scarring of the fallopian tubes can lead to
infertility
and reproductive problems.
Abdominal and pelvic adhesions can cause chronic pain.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have:
Abdominal pain
An inability to pass gas
Nausea and vomiting that do not go away
Pain in the belly that is severe and crampy
Alternative Names
Pelvic adhesion; Intraperitoneal adhesion; Intrauterine adhesion
Images
Pelvic adhesions
References
Kuemmerle JF. Inflammatory and anatomic diseases of the intestine, peritoneum, mesentery, and omentum. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 128.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases website. Abdominal adhesions.
www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/abdominal-adhesions
. Updated June 2019. Accessed June 3, 2024.
Yepuri N, Pruekprasert N. Cooney RN. Surgical complications. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery.
21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 12.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: LaQuita Martinez, MD, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Emory Johns Creek Hospital, Alpharetta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Adhesions