Scalded skin syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Scalded skin syndrome
Scalded skin syndrome
Scalded skin syndrome (SSS) is a skin infection caused by staphylococcus bacteria in which the skin becomes damaged and sheds.
Causes
Scalded skin syndrome is caused by infection with certain strains of staphylococcus bacteria. The bacteria produce a toxin that causes skin damage. The damage creates blisters, as if the skin were scalded by heat. These blisters can occur at areas of the skin away from the initial site.
SSS is found most commonly in infants and children under the age of 5.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Blisters
Fever
Large areas of skin peel or fall away (exfoliation or desquamation)
Painful skin
Redness of the skin (
erythema
), which spreads to cover most of the body
Skin slips off with gentle pressure, leaving wet red areas (
Nikolsky sign
)
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and look at the skin. The exam may show that the skin slips off when it is rubbed (positive Nikolsky sign).
Tests may include:
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Cultures of the
skin
,
throat and nose
, and
blood
Electrolyte
test
Skin biopsy
(in rare cases)
Treatment
Antibiotics are given by mouth or through a vein (
intravenously
; IV) to help fight the infection. IV fluids are also given to prevent dehydration. Much of the body's fluid is lost through open skin.
Moist compresses to the skin may improve comfort. You can apply a moisturizing ointment to keep the skin moist. Healing begins about 10 days after treatment.
Outlook (Prognosis)
A full recovery is expected.
Possible Complications
Complications that may result include:
Abnormal level of fluids in the body causing
dehydration
or
electrolyte
imbalance
Poor temperature control (in young infants)
Severe bloodstream infection (
septicemia
)
Spread to deeper skin infection (
cellulitis
)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of this disorder.
Prevention
The disorder may not be preventable. Treating any staphylococcus infection quickly can help.
Alternative Names
Ritter disease; Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome; SSS
References
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al. Cutaneous bacterial infections. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 706.
Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Bacterial, mycobacterial, and protozoal infections of the skin. In: Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds.
Paller and Mancini-Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 14.
Pulia M, May LS. Skin and soft tissue infections. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 126.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Skin Infections
Staphylococcal Infections