LDH isoenzyme blood test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
LDH isoenzyme blood test
LDH isoenzyme blood test
The
lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) isoenzyme test checks how much of the different types of LDH, called isoenzymes, are present in the blood.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
Your health care provider may tell you to temporarily stop taking certain medicines before the test.
Medicines that can increase LDH measurements include:
Anesthetics
Aspirin
Colchicine
Clofibrate
Cocaine
Fluorides
Mithramycin
Narcotics
Procainamide
Statins
Steroids (glucocorticoids such as hydrocortisone or prednisone)
Do not stop taking any medicine before talking to your provider.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel slight pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
LDH is an
enzyme
found in many body tissues such as the heart, liver, kidney, skeletal muscle, brain, blood cells, and lungs. When body tissue is damaged, LDH is released into the blood.
The LDH test helps determine the location of tissue damage.
LDH exists in five forms, which differ slightly in structure.
LDH-1 is found primarily in heart muscle and red blood cells.
LDH-2 is concentrated in white blood cells.
LDH-3 is highest in the lung.
LDH-4 is highest in the kidney, placenta, and pancreas.
LDH-5 is highest in the liver and skeletal muscle.
All of these can be measured in the blood.
What Abnormal Results Mean
LDH levels that are higher than normal may suggest:
Hemolytic anemia
Low blood pressure (
hypotension
)
Infectious mononucleosis
Intestinal ischemia (blood deficiency) or infarction (tissue death)
Ischemic cardiomyopathy
Liver disease such as
hepatitis
Lung tissue death
Muscle injury
Muscular dystrophy
Pancreatitis
Stroke
Risks
There is little risk in having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Alternative Names
LD; LDH; Lactic (lactate) dehydrogenase isoenzymes
Images
Blood test
References
Korneblat KM. Approach to the patient with jaundice or abnormal liver tests. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 133.
Pincus MR, Carty RP. Clinical enzymology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 21.
Review Date 2/13/2025
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Anemia
Cardiomyopathy
Heart Attack
Infectious Mononucleosis
Liver Diseases
Lung Diseases
Muscular Dystrophy
Pancreatic Diseases
Stroke