Laminectomy: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Laminectomy
Laminectomy
Laminectomy is surgery to remove the lamina. This is part of the bone that makes up a vertebra in the spine. Laminectomy may also be done to remove bone spurs or a
herniated (slipped) disk
in your spine. The procedure can take pressure off your spinal nerves or spinal cord.
Description
Laminectomy opens up your spinal canal so your spinal nerves have more room. It may be done along with a
diskectomy
,
foraminotomy
, or
spinal fusion
. You will be asleep and feel no pain (
general anesthesia
).
During surgery:
You usually lie on your belly on the operating table. The surgeon makes an incision (cut) in the middle of your back or neck.
The skin, muscles, and ligaments are moved to the side. Your surgeon may use a surgical microscope to see inside your back.
Part or all of the lamina bones may be removed on both sides of your spine, along with the spinous process, the sharp part of your spine that you can feel.
Your surgeon may remove any small disk fragments, bone spurs, or other soft tissue.
Your surgeon may also do a foraminotomy at this time to widen the opening where nerve roots travel out of the spine.
Your surgeon may do a spinal fusion to make sure your spinal column is stable after surgery.
The muscles and other tissues are put back in place. The skin is sewn together.
The surgery takes 1 to 3 hours.
Why the Procedure is Performed
Laminectomy is often done to treat
spinal stenosis
(narrowing of the spinal column). The procedure removes bones and damaged disks, and makes more room for your spinal nerve and column.
You may have the following symptoms:
Pain or numbness in one or both legs
Pain around your
shoulder blade area
Weakness or heaviness in your buttocks or legs
Problems emptying or controlling your bladder and bowel
Symptoms may be more likely, or worse, when you are standing or walking. They can improve when you are leaning over.
You and your health care provider can decide when you need to have surgery for these symptoms. Spinal stenosis symptoms often become worse over time, but this may happen very slowly.
When your symptoms become more severe and interfere with your daily life or your job, surgery may help.
Risks
Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general are:
Reaction to medicine or
breathing problems
Bleeding
,
blood clots
, or infection
Risks of spine surgery are:
Infection in wound or vertebral bones
Damage to a spinal nerve, causing weakness, pain, or loss of feeling
Partial or no relief of pain after surgery
Return of back pain in the future
Spinal fluid leak that can lead to headaches
If you have spinal fusion, your spinal column above and below the fusion is more likely to give you problems in the future.
Before the Procedure
You will have an
x-ray
of your spine. You may also have an
MRI
or CT myelogram before the procedure to confirm that you have spinal stenosis and its exact location. You may also have had spinal injections beforehand to determine the part of the spine that is giving you the symptoms.
Tell your surgeon or nurse if:
You are or could be pregnant
You are taking any medicines, including illicit drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription
During the week before your surgery:
You may be asked to temporarily stop taking medicines that keep your blood from clotting. These medicines are called blood thinners. This includes over-the-counter medicines and supplements such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and vitamin E. Many prescription medicines are also blood thinners.
Ask your surgeon which medicines you should still take on the day of your surgery.
If you smoke, it's important to cut back or quit. Smoking can slow healing and increase the risk for
blood clots
. Ask your provider for help
quitting smoking
.
If needed,
prepare your home
to make it easier to recover after surgery.
If you have
diabetes
,
heart disease
, or other medical problems, your surgeon may ask you to see the provider who treats you for these conditions.
Tell your surgeon if you have been drinking a lot of alcohol, more than 1 or 2 drinks a day.
Let your surgeon know right away about any illness you may have before your surgery. This includes
COVID-19
, a
cold
,
flu
, fever, herpes breakout, or other illnesses you may have. If you do get sick, your surgery may need to be postponed.
You may want to visit a physical therapist to learn some exercises to do before surgery and to practice using crutches.
On the day of the surgery:
Follow instructions about when to stop eating and drinking.
Take the medicines your surgeon told you to take with a small sip of water.
Arrive at the hospital on time.
After the Procedure
Your provider will encourage you to get up and walk around as soon as the anesthesia wears off, if you did not also have spinal fusion.
Most people go home the same day or 1 to 2 days after their surgery. At home, follow instructions on how to
care for your wound and back
.
You should be able to drive within a week or two and resume light work after 4 weeks, especially if you didn't have a fusion performed.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Laminectomy for spinal stenosis often provides full or some relief from symptoms.
Future spine problems are possible for all people after spine surgery. If you had laminectomy and spinal fusion, the spinal column above and below the fusion are more likely to have problems in the future.
You could have other future problems if you needed more than one kind of procedure in addition to the laminectomy (diskectomy, foraminotomy, or spinal fusion).
Alternative Names
Lumbar decompression; Decompressive laminectomy; Spine surgery - laminectomy; Back pain - laminectomy; Stenosis - laminectomy
Patient Instructions
Spine surgery - discharge
References
Casper DS, Maslak JP, Pelle D. Posterior cervical decompressions: cervical laminectomy and laminoforaminotomy. In: Steinmetz MP, Berven SH, Benzel EC, eds.
Benzel's Spine Surgery
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 105.
Derman PB, Rihn J, Albert TJ. Surgical management of lumbar spinal stenosis. In: Garfin SR, Eismont FJ, Bell GR, Fischgrund JS, Bono CM, eds.
Rothman-Simeone and Herkowitz's The Spine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 63.
Review Date 11/7/2024
Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Spinal Stenosis
Spine Injuries and Disorders