Methanol test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Methanol test
Methanol test
Methanol is a substance that can occur naturally in very small amounts in the body. The main sources of methanol in the body include fruits, vegetables, and diet drinks that contain aspartame.
Methanol is a type of alcohol that is sometimes used for industrial and automotive purposes. It is most common in cleaning fluids and solvents. It can be
toxic
if you eat or drink it in amounts as small as 1 teaspoon (5 milliliters) or if you inhale it. Methanol is sometimes called "wood alcohol."
A test can be done to measure the amount of methanol in your blood.
How the Test is Performed
A blood sample is needed. The blood is collected from a vein, most often in your arm or hand
venipuncture
.
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is necessary.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing where the needle was inserted.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is done to see if you have a toxic level of methanol in your body. You should not drink or inhale methanol. However, some people accidentally drink methanol, or drink it on purpose as a substitute for grain alcohol (ethanol).
Methanol is very poisonous if you eat or drink it in amounts as little as 1 teaspoon (5 milliliters). Methanol poisoning mainly affects the digestive system, nervous system, and eyes, and permanent blindness may occur.
Normal Results
A normal result is below a toxic cut-off level.
What Abnormal Results Mean
An abnormal result means you may have methanol poisoning.
Risks
Risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting
or feeling lightheaded
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Images
Blood test
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Emergency Response Safety and Health Database. Methanol: systemic agent.
www.cdc.gov/niosh/ershdb/emergencyresponsecard_29750029.html
. Updated May 12, 2011. Accessed November 13, 2024.
Nelson ME. Toxic alcohols. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 136.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Review Date 10/27/2024
Updated by: Laura J. Martin, MD, MPH, ABIM Board Certified in Internal Medicine and Hospice and Palliative Medicine, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning