Potato plant poisoning - green tubers and sprouts: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Potato plant poisoning - green tubers and sprouts
Potato plant poisoning - green tubers and sprouts
Potato plant poisoning occurs when someone eats the green tubers or new sprouts of the potato plant.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
The poisonous ingredient is:
Solanine (very toxic even in small amounts)
Where Found
The poison is found throughout the plant, but particularly in green potatoes and new sprouts. Never eat potatoes that are spoiled or green below the skin. Always throw away the sprouts.
Potatoes that are not green and have had any sprouts removed are safe to eat.
DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods.
Symptoms
Effects are mostly gastrointestinal. They are often delayed 8 to 10 hours. Central nervous system effects may occur in large ingestions. These poisonings can be very dangerous.
Symptoms may include:
Abdominal or stomach pain
Delirium
(agitation and confusion)
Diarrhea
Dilated (wide) pupils
Fever
Hallucinations
Headache
Loss of sensation
Lower than normal body temperature
(hypothermia)
Nausea and vomiting
Paralysis
Shock
Slow pulse
Slowed breathing
Vision changes
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Name and part of the plant that was swallowed, if known
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen through a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator)
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Fluids by IV (through the vein)
Laxatives
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Symptoms may last for 1 to 3 days, and hospitalization may be necessary.
Death has been reported, but is rare.
DO NOT touch or eat any plant with which you are not familiar. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods.
Alternative Names
Solanum tuberosum poisoning
References
Auerbach PS, Constance BB, Freer L. Toxic Plants. In: Auerbach PS, Constance BB, Freer L, eds.
Field Guide to Wilderness Medicine
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 40.
Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 65.
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM. Nonbacterial food poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 740.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning