Decorticate posture: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Decorticate posture
Decorticate posture
Decorticate posture is an abnormal posturing in which a person is stiff with bent arms, clenched fists, and legs held out straight. The arms are bent in toward the body and the wrists and fingers are bent and held on the chest.
This type of posturing is a sign of severe damage in the brain. People who have this condition should get medical attention right away.
Considerations
Decorticate posture is a sign of damage to the nerve pathway in the midbrain, which is between the brain and spinal cord. The midbrain regulates motor movement and many other important functions. Although decorticate posture is serious, it is usually not as serious as a type of abnormal posture called
decerebrate posture
.
The posturing may occur on one or both sides of the body.
Causes
Causes of decorticate posture include:
Bleeding in the brain from any cause
Brain stem tumor
Stroke
Brain problem due to illicit drugs, poisoning, or infection
Traumatic brain injury
Brain problem due to liver failure
Increased pressure in the brain
from any cause
Brain tumor
Infections, such as
meningitis
or encephalitis
Reye syndrome
(sudden brain damage and liver function problems that affects children)
Brain injury from lack of oxygen
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Abnormal posturing of any kind usually occurs with a reduced level of alertness. Anyone who has an abnormal posture should receive urgent medical attention.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The person will receive emergency treatment. This includes getting a breathing tube and breathing assistance. The person will be admitted to the intensive care unit.
After the condition is stable, their health care provider will get a medical history from family members or friends and a more detailed physical exam will be done. This will include a careful exam of the brain and nervous system.
Medical history questions may include:
When did the symptoms start?
Is there a pattern to the episodes?
Is the body posturing always the same?
Is there any history of illicit drug use, or a head injury, or other condition?
What other symptoms occurred before or with the abnormal posturing?
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests to check blood counts, screen for illicit drugs and toxic substances, and measure body chemicals and minerals
Cerebral angiography
-- a dye and x-ray study of blood vessels in the brain
MRI
or
CT scan of the head
Electroencephalogram
(EEG) brain wave testing
Intracranial pressure
(ICP) monitoring
Lumbar puncture
to collect cerebrospinal fluid
The outlook depends on the cause. There may be brain and nervous system injury and permanent brain damage, which can lead to:
Inability to communicate
Paralysis
Seizures
Death
Coma
Alternative Names
Abnormal posturing - decorticate posture; Traumatic brain injury - decorticate posture
References
Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW. Neurologic system. In: Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW, eds.
Seidel's Guide to Physical Examination.
10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 23.
Berger JR, Price R. Stupor and coma. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 5.
Greer DM, Bernat JL. Coma, disorders of consciousness, and brain death. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 373.
Hamati AI, Felkar MV. Neurological complications of systemic disease: children. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 59.
Lei C, Smith C. Depressed consciousness and coma. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 12.
Papa L, Goldberg SA. Head trauma. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 33.
Review Date 4/16/2025
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Neurologic Diseases