Esophageal spasm: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Esophageal spasm
Esophageal spasm
Esophageal spasms are abnormal contractions of the muscles in the esophagus, the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach. These
spasms
may not move food effectively to the stomach.
Causes
The cause of esophageal spasm is unknown. Very hot or very cold foods may trigger spasms in some people.  Muscle or nerve problems in the esophagus may cause the spasm.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Problems swallowing
or pain with swallowing
Pain in the chest
or upper abdomen
It can be hard to tell a spasm from
angina
pectoris, a symptom of heart disease. The pain may spread to the neck, jaw, arms, or back
Exams and Tests
Tests you may need to look for the condition include:
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
(EGD)
Esophageal manometry
Esophagogram (barium swallow x-ray)
Heart evaluation if there is concern that the spasm sensation stems from heart disease
Treatment
Nitroglycerin given under the tongue (sublingual) may help a sudden episode of esophageal spasm. Long-acting nitroglycerin and calcium channel blockers are also used for the problem.
Long-term (chronic) cases are sometimes treated with low-dose antidepressants such as trazodone or nortriptyline to reduce symptoms.
Occasionally, spasm may improve with medicines that block acid production.
Botulinum toxin injections may be done into the esophagus for some conditions that may cause esophageal spasm, such as achalasia, and for distal esophageal spasm.
Rarely, certain cases may need dilation (widening) of the esophagus by endoscopic myotomy (cutting the affected muscles in the esophagus). Surgery may be needed to control symptoms in the case of spastic achalasia.
Outlook (Prognosis)
An esophageal spasm may come and go (intermittent) or last for a long time (
chronic)
. Medicine can help relieve symptoms in many cases.  However, other treatments may be needed, especially in the case of achalasia.
Possible Complications
The condition may not respond to treatment.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have symptoms of esophageal spasm that don't go away. The symptoms may actually be due to heart problems. Your provider can help decide if you need heart tests.
Prevention
Avoid very hot or very cold foods if you get esophageal spasms.  If the spasm also causes trouble swallowing, avoiding difficult foods such as meat, dry breads, and rice may help.
Alternative Names
Spasm of the esophagus; Distal esophageal spasm; Jackhammer esophagus; Achalasia
Images
Digestive system
Throat anatomy
Esophagus
References
Falk GW, Katzka DA. Diseases of the esophagus. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine.
27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 124.
Pandolfino JE, Kahrilas PJ. Esophageal neuromuscular function and motility disorders. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.
11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 44.
Review Date 10/30/2024
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Gastroenterologist, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Esophagus Disorders