Decerebrate posture: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Decerebrate posture
Decerebrate posture
Decerebrate posture is an abnormal body posture that involves the arms and legs being held straight out, the toes being pointed downward, and the head and neck being arched backward. The muscles are tightened and held rigidly. This type of posturing usually means there has been severe damage to the brain. People who have this condition should get medical attention right away.
Considerations
A severe injury to the brain is the usual cause of decerebrate posture.
Opisthotonos
(a severe muscle spasm of the neck and back) may appear the same as decerebrate posture.
Decerebrate posture can occur on one side, on both sides, or in just the arms. It may alternate with another type of abnormal posture called
decorticate posture
. A person can also have decorticate posture on one side of the body and decerebrate posture on the other side.
Causes
Causes of decerebrate posture include:
Bleeding in the brain from any cause
Brain stem tumor
Stroke
Brain problem due to illicit drugs, poisoning, or infection
Traumatic brain injury
Brain problem due to liver failure
Increased pressure in the brain
from any cause
Brain tumor
Infections, such as
meningitis
or encephalitis
Reye syndrome
(sudden brain damage and liver function problems that affects children)
Brain injury from lack of oxygen
Home Care
Conditions related to decerebrate posture need to be treated right away in a hospital.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Abnormal posturing of any kind usually occurs with a reduced level of alertness. Anyone who has an abnormal posture should receive urgent medical attention.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The person will need emergency treatment right away. This includes breathing assistance and placement of a breathing tube. The person will be admitted to intensive care.
Once the person is stable, the provider will obtain a complete medical history from family members or friends and do a more complete physical exam. This will include a careful exam of the brain and nervous system.
Family members will be asked questions about the person's medical history, including:
When did the symptoms start?
Is there a pattern to the episodes?
Is the body posturing always the same?
Is there any history of illicit drug use, or a head injury, or other condition?
What other symptoms came before or with the abnormal posturing?
Tests may include:
Blood and urine tests to check blood counts, screen for illicit drugs and toxic substances, and measure body chemicals and minerals
Cerebral angiography
(dye and x-ray study of blood vessels in the brain)
CT
or
MRI of the head
Electroencephalogram
(EEG) -- brain wave testing
Intracranial pressure
(ICP) monitoring
Lumbar puncture
to collect cerebrospinal fluid
The outlook depends on the cause. There may be brain and nervous system injury and permanent brain damage, which can lead to:
Inability to communicate
Paralysis
Seizures
Death
Coma
Alternative Names
Opisthotonos - decerebrate posture; Abnormal posturing - decerebrate posture; Traumatic brain injury - decerebrate posture; Decorticate posture - decerebrate posture
References
Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW. Neurologic system. In: Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW, eds.
Seidel's Guide to Physical Examination.
10th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2023:chap 23.
Berger JR, Price R. Stupor and coma. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 5.
Greer DM, Bernat JL. Coma, disorders of consciousness, and brain death. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 373.
Hamati AI, Felker MV. Neurological complications of systemic disease: children. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 59.
Lei C, Smith C. Depressed consciousness and coma. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 12.
Papa L, Goldberg SA. Head trauma. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 33.
Review Date 4/16/2025
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Neurologic Diseases