Anti-rust product poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Anti-rust product poisoning
Anti-rust product poisoning
Anti-rust product poisoning occurs when someone breathes in or swallows anti-rust products. These products may be accidentally breathed in (inhaled) if they are used in a small, poorly ventilated area, such as a garage.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Anti-rust agents contain different poisonous substances, including:
Chelating agents
Hydrocarbons
Hydrochloric acid
Nitrites
Oxalic acid
Phosphoric acid
Where Found
Various anti-rust products
Symptoms
Anti-rust product poisoning can cause symptoms in many parts of the body.
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Loss of vision
Severe pain in the throat
Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
Blood in the stool
Burns of the throat (esophagus)
Severe
abdominal pain
Vomiting
Vomiting blood
HEART AND BLOOD
Collapse
Low blood pressure
Methemoglobinemia
(very dark blood from abnormal red blood cells)
Too much or too little acid in the blood, which leads to damage in all of the body organs
KIDNEYS
Kidney failure
Many of the most dangerous effects of poisoning from anti-rust products come from inhaling the substance.
LUNGS AND AIRWAYS
Breathing difficulty
Throat swelling (may also cause breathing difficulty)
Asphyxia  (state of having insufficient oxygen in the blood)
Chemical
pneumonitis
(inflammation of the lung)
Secondary bacterial or viral infection
Hemorrhagic pulmonary edema
Respiratory distress or failure
Pneumothorax
Pleural effusion
Empyema
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Coma
Confusion
Dizziness
Incoordination
Somnolence
Headache
Blurred vision
Weakness
Brain damage from low oxygen level
SKIN
Burns
Irritation
Holes (
necrosis
) in the skin or tissues underneath
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make a person throw up unless told to do so by the poison control center or a health care professional.
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. Do not give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow.
If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move them to fresh air.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. You may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth and into the lungs, connected to a breathing machine (ventilator)
Bronchoscopy
-- a small camera down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Endoscopy
-- a small camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach
Fluids through the vein (by IV)
Methylene blue -- a medicine to reverse the effect of the poison
Surgical removal of burned skin (skin debridement)
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach (
gastric lavage
)
Washing of the skin (irrigation), perhaps every few hours for several days
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster the person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Swallowing such poisons can have severe effects on many parts of the body. Damage continues to occur to the kidneys, liver, esophagus, and stomach for several weeks after the substance was swallowed. The outcome depends on this damage.
References
Hoyte C. Caustics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 143.
Kuschner WG, Blanc PD. Acute responses to toxic exposures. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray & Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 103.
Tibballs J. Paediatric poisoning and envenomation. In: Bersten AD, Handy JM, eds.
Oh's Intensive Care Manual
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 114.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.