Low blood potassium: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Low blood potassium
Low blood potassium
Low blood potassium level is a condition in which the amount of potassium in the blood is lower than normal. The medical name of this condition is hypokalemia.
Causes
Potassium is an
electrolyte
(mineral). It is needed for cells to function properly. You get potassium through food. The kidneys remove excess potassium through the urinary system to keep a proper balance of the mineral in the body.
Common causes of low blood potassium include:
Medicines, such as diuretics (water pills), certain antibiotics (amphotericin B, chloroquine at toxic levels)
Diarrhea or vomiting
Eating disorders (such as
bulimia
)
Hyperaldosteronism
Laxative overuse, which can cause diarrhea
Chronic kidney disease
Low magnesium level
Sweating
Genetic disorders, such as
hypokalemic periodic paralysis
,
Bartter syndrome
Symptoms
A small drop in the blood potassium level often does not cause symptoms or causes mild to moderate symptoms, which may include:
Constipation
Feeling of skipped heart beats or
palpitations
Fatigue
Muscle damage
Muscle weakness or spasms
Tingling or numbness
A large drop in the blood potassium level may lead to
abnormal heart rhythms
, especially in people with heart disease. This can cause you to feel lightheaded or faint. A very low blood potassium level can even cause your heart to stop.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will order a blood test to check your
potassium level
. Normal range is 3.7 to 5.2 mEq/L (3.7 to 5.2 mmol/L).
Other blood tests may be ordered to check levels of:
Glucose, magnesium, calcium, sodium, phosphorous
Thyroid hormone
Aldosterone
An electrocardiogram (ECG) to check the heart may also be done.
Treatment
If your condition is mild, your provider will likely prescribe oral potassium pills. If your condition is severe, you may need to get potassium through a vein (IV).
If you need diuretics, your provider may:
Switch you to a form that keeps potassium in the body. This type of diuretic is called potassium-sparing.
Prescribe extra potassium for you to take every day.
Eating foods rich in potassium can help treat and prevent low level of potassium. These foods include:
Avocados
Baked potato
Bananas
Bran
Carrots
Cooked lean beef
Milk
Oranges
Peanut butter
Peas and beans
Salmon
Seaweed
Spinach
Tomatoes
Wheat germ
Outlook (Prognosis)
Taking potassium supplements can usually correct the problem. In severe cases, without proper treatment, a severe drop in the blood potassium level can lead to serious heart rhythm problems that can be fatal.
Possible Complications
In severe cases, life-threatening paralysis may develop, such as with hypokalemic periodic paralysis.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call your provider right away if you have been vomiting or have had excessive diarrhea, or if you are taking diuretics and have symptoms of hypokalemia.
Alternative Names
Potassium - low; Low blood potassium; Hypokalemia
Images
Blood test
References
Mount DB. Disorders of potassium balance. In: Yu ASL, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Taal MW, eds.
Brenner and Rector's The Kidney
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 17.
Seifter JL. Potassium disorders. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 109.
Review Date 6/12/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Kidney Diseases
Potassium