Caffeine overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Caffeine overdose
Caffeine overdose
Caffeine is a substance that exists naturally in certain plants. It can also be man-made and added to food products. It stimulates the central nervous system and is a diuretic, which means it increases urination.
Caffeine
overdose
occurs when someone takes in more than a normal or recommended amount. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Caffeine can be harmful in large amounts.
Where Found
Caffeine is an ingredient in these products:
Certain soft drinks (such as Pepsi, Coke, Mountain Dew)
Certain teas
Chocolate, including hot chocolate drinks
Coffee
Energy drinks
Over-the-counter stimulants that help you stay awake such as NoDoz, Vivarin, Caffedrine, and others
Workout supplements, such as Force Factor Fuego, Red Bull and 5-hour Energy drinks, and many more
Other products may also contain caffeine.
Symptoms
Symptoms of caffeine overdose in adults may include:
Breathing trouble
Changes in alertness
Agitation,
confusion
, hallucinations
Convulsions
(seizures)
Diarrhea
Dizziness
Fever
Increased thirst
Increased urination
Irregular heartbeat
Muscle twitching
Nausea, vomiting
Rapid heartbeat
Sleeping trouble
Symptoms in babies may include:
Muscles that are very tense, then very relaxed
Nausea, vomiting
Rapid, deep breathing
Rapid heartbeat
Shock
Tremors
The acute symptoms of caffeine intoxication (overdose, poisoning) and generalized anxiety disorder are almost identical.
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison control. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Treatment may include:
Activated charcoal
Breathing support, which may include oxygen or a ventilator (tube through the mouth into the lungs and breathing machine
Intravenous fluids (IV, given through a vein)
Laxative
Medicine to treat symptoms
Shock to the heart for serious heart rhythm disturbances
Outlook (Prognosis)
A brief hospital stay may be necessary to complete treatment. In severe cases, death may result from convulsions or an irregular heartbeat.
References
Aronson JK. Caffeine. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:7-15.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Zun LS, Nathan JB. Anxiety disorders. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 98.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Caffeine