Short bowel syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Short bowel syndrome
Short bowel syndrome
Short bowel syndrome is a problem that occurs when part of the small intestine is missing or has been removed during surgery. Nutrients are
not properly absorbed into the body
as a result.
Causes
The small intestine absorbs much of the nutrients found in foods we eat. When two-thirds or more of the small intestine is missing, the body may not absorb enough food to stay healthy and maintain your weight.
Some infants are born missing part or much of their small intestine.
More often, short bowel syndrome occurs because much of the small intestine is removed during surgery. This type of surgery may be needed:
After gunshots or other trauma damaged the intestines
For someone with severe
Crohn disease
For infants, often born too early, when
part of their intestines dies
When blood flow to the small intestine is reduced due to blood clots or narrowed arteries
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Diarrhea
Fatigue
Pale, greasy stools
Swelling (
edema
), especially of the legs
Very
foul-smelling stools
Weight loss
Dehydration
Exams and Tests
The following tests may be done:
Blood chemistry tests (such as
albumin level
)
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Fecal fat
test
Small intestine x-ray
Vitamin levels in the blood
Treatment
Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms and ensuring the body receives enough hydration and nutrients.
A high-calorie diet that supplies:
Key vitamins and minerals, such as
iron
, folic acid, and
vitamin B12
Enough carbohydrates, proteins, and fats
If needed, injections of some vitamins and minerals or special growth factors will be given.
Medicines to slow down the normal movement of the intestine can be tried. This may allow food to remain in the intestine longer. Medicines to lower the amount of stomach acid may also be needed.
If the body is not able to absorb enough nutrients,
total parenteral nutrition (TPN)
is tried. It will help you or your child get nutrition from a special formula through a vein in the body. Your health care provider will select the right amount of calories and TPN solution. Sometimes, you can also eat and drink while getting nutrition from TPN.
Small bowel transplantation is an option in some cases.
A medicine called teduglutide is available to help the bowel adjust to the shorted intestine. It helps in specific situations. Ask your provider if it might help you.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The condition may improve over time if it is due to surgery. Nutrient absorption may slowly get better.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine
Nervous system problems caused by a lack of vitamin B12 (This problem can be treated with vitamin B12 injections.)
Too much acid in the blood (metabolic
acidosis
due to diarrhea)
Gallstones
Kidney stones
Dehydration
Malnutrition
Weakened bones (osteomalacia)
Weight loss
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you develop symptoms of short bowel syndrome, especially after you have had bowel surgery.
Alternative Names
Small intestine insufficiency; Short gut syndrome; Necrotizing enterocolitis - short bowel
Images
Digestive system
Digestive system organs
References
Buchman AL. Short bowel syndrome. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 106.
Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 126.
Venick RS. Short bowel syndrome. In: Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds.
Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 35.
Review Date 5/14/2024
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Aria - Jefferson Health Torresdale, Jefferson Digestive Diseases Network, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Malabsorption Syndromes
Small Intestine Disorders