Pleural fluid analysis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pleural fluid analysis
Pleural fluid analysis
Pleural fluid analysis is a test that examines a sample of fluid that has collected in the pleural space. This is the space between the lining of the outside of the lungs (pleura) and the wall of the chest. When fluid collects in the pleural space, the condition is called
pleural effusion
.
How the Test is Performed
A procedure called
thoracentesis
is used to get a sample of pleural fluid. Your health care provider tests the sample to look for:
Cancerous (malignant) cells
Other types of cells (for example blood cells)
Levels of glucose, protein and other chemicals
Bacteria, fungi, mycobacteria, viruses, and other germs that can cause infections
Inflammation
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is needed before the test. An
ultrasound
,
CT scan
, or
chest x-ray
will be performed before and after the test.
Do not cough, breathe deeply, or move during the test to avoid injury to the lung.
Tell your provider if you take medicines to thin the blood.
How the Test will Feel
For thoracentesis, you sit on the edge of a chair or bed with your head and arms resting on a table. Your provider cleans your skin around the insertion site. Numbing medicine (anesthetic) is injected into your skin.
A needle is placed through the skin and muscles of your chest wall into the pleural space. As fluid drains into a collection bottle, you may cough a bit. This is because your lung re-expands to fill the space where fluid had been. This sensation may last for a few hours after the test.
During the test, tell your provider if you have sharp chest pain or shortness of breath.
Ultrasound is often used to decide where to insert the needle and to get a better view of the fluid in your chest.
Why the Test is Performed
The test is performed to determine the cause of a pleural effusion. It is also done to relieve the shortness of breath that a large pleural effusion can cause.
Normal Results
Normally the pleural space contains less than 20 milliliters (4 teaspoons) of clear, yellowish (serous) fluid.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may indicate possible causes of pleural effusion, such as:
Cancer
Cirrhosis
Heart failure
Infection
Severe
malnutrition
Very low protein (albumin) in the blood
Trauma
Abnormal connections between the pleural space and other organs (for example, the esophagus)
If your provider suspects an infection, a
culture of the fluid
is done to check for bacteria and other microbes.
The test may also be performed for
hemothorax
. This is a collection of blood in the pleura.
Risks
Risks of thoracentesis are:
Collapsed lung (
pneumothorax
)
Excessive loss of blood
Fluid re-accumulation
Infection
Pulmonary edema
Respiratory distress
Cough that doesn't go away
Serious complications are uncommon.
Images
Pleural cavity
References
Blok BK. Thoracentesis. In: Roberts JR, Custalow CB, Thomsen TW, eds.
Roberts & Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine and Acute Care
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 9.
Broaddus VC, Light RW. Pleural effusion. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 108.
Review Date 11/25/2023
Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron Jr. Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cancer
Cirrhosis
Heart Failure
Pleural Disorders