Photographic fixative poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Photographic fixative poisoning
Photographic fixative poisoning
Photographic fixatives are chemicals used to develop photographs.
This article discusses poisoning from swallowing such chemicals.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Poisonous ingredients include:
Hydroquinones
Quinones
Sodium thiosulfate
Sodium sulfite
Sodium bisulfite
Potassium aluminum sulfate
Boric acid
The fixing agent, sodium thiosulfate, along with the preservative, sodium bisulfite, can break down (decompose) to form sulfur dioxide gas, which can damage the lungs and provoke asthma attacks.
Where Found
These chemicals are found in products used to develop photographs.
Symptoms
Poisoning symptoms may include:
Abdominal pain
Cough
Shortness of breath
Burning pain in the throat
Blurred vision
Eye irritation or burning
Coma
Diarrhea
(watery, bloody, green-blue colored)
Low blood pressure
Skin irritation or rash
Stupor
(confusion, decreased level of consciousness)
Vomiting
Ringing in the ears
Lack of coordination
Home Care
Seek immediate emergency medical help. DO NOT make the person throw up. Give water or milk unless the person is
unconscious
or having
convulsions
. Contact poison control for further help.
Before Calling Emergency
Determine the following information:
The person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
If you go to the emergency room, take the container for the poison with you, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal, so that the poison that remains does not get absorbed into the stomach and digestive tract.
Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration.
Chest x-ray
.
ECG
(electrocardiogram, or heart tracing).
Endoscopy -- camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and stomach.
Fluids through a vein (by IV).
Laxatives to move the poison quickly through the body.
Medicines to treat symptoms.
Tube through the mouth into the stomach (rare) to wash out the stomach (
gastric lavage
).
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on how much of the poison was swallowed and how quickly the person received medical help. Swallowing these products can cause severe effects in many parts of the body. The faster treatment is received, the greater the chance of recovery.
Alternative Names
Photographic developer poisoning; Hydroquinone poisoning; Quinone poisoning; Sulfite poisoning
References
Crinion S. Toxicology. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook, The
. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 3.
Hoyte C. Caustics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 143.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 10/7/2024
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.