Tabes dorsalis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Tabes dorsalis
Tabes dorsalis
Tabes dorsalis is a complication of untreated
syphilis
that involves muscle weakness and abnormal sensations.
Causes
Tabes dorsalis is a form of
neurosyphilis
, which is a complication of late-stage syphilis infection. Syphilis is a bacterial infection that is spread sexually.
When syphilis is untreated, the bacteria may damage the spinal cord and
peripheral
nervous tissue. This leads to the symptoms of tabes dorsalis.
Tabes dorsalis is now very rare because syphilis is usually treated early in the disease.
Symptoms
Symptoms of tabes dorsalis are caused by damage to the nervous system. Symptoms include any of the following:
Abnormal sensations (
paresthesia
), often called lightning pains
Problems walking due to nerve damage causing the person to walk with the legs far apart and feet slapping the ground
Loss of coordination and reflexes
Joint damage, especially to the knees
Muscle weakness
Vision changes
Bladder control problems
Sexual function problems
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a
physical exam
, focusing on the nervous system.
If syphilis infection is suspected, tests may include the following:
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF-VDRL) exam
Head CT
,
spine CT
, or
MRI
scans of the brain and spinal cord to rule out other diseases
Serum VDRL
or serum
RPR
(used as a screening test for syphilis infection)
If the serum VDRL or serum RPR test is positive, more tests are required to confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment
The goals of treatment are to cure the infection and slow the disease. Treating the infection helps prevent new nerve damage and may reduce symptoms. Treatment does not reverse existing nerve damage.
Medicines likely to be given include:
Penicillin or other antibiotics for a long time to make sure the infection goes away
Painkillers to control pain
Symptoms of existing nervous system damage need to be treated. People who are unable to eat, dress themselves, or take care of themselves may need help. Rehabilitation, physical therapy, and occupational therapy may help with muscle weakness.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Left untreated, tabes dorsalis may lead to disability.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Blindness
Paralysis
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have:
Loss of coordination
Loss of muscle strength
Loss of sensation
Prevention
Proper treatment and follow-up of syphilis infections reduces the risk of developing tabes dorsalis.
If you are sexually active,
practice safer sex
and always use a condom.
All pregnant women should be screened for syphilis. Also, people at increased risk for getting syphilis should be screened for it. Common examples include men who have sex with men, people with HIV infection, young adults, and people with a history of incarceration, sex work, military service or illicit drug use.
Alternative Names
Locomotor ataxia; Syphilitic myelopathy; Syphilitic myeloneuropathy; Myelopathy - syphilitic; Tabetic neurosyphilis
Images
Superficial anterior muscles
Primary syphilis
Late-stage syphilis
References
Dionne JA, Ghanem KG. Syphilis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 295.
Radolf JD, Tramont EC, Salazar JC. Syphilis (
Treponema pallidum
). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 237.
US Preventive Services Task Force website. Syphilis infection in nonpregnant adolescents and adults: Screening.
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/announcements/final-recommendation-statement-screening-syphilis-infection-nonpregnant-adolescents-and-adults
. Updated September 27, 2022. Accessed November 9, 2024.
Review Date 8/29/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Spinal Cord Diseases
Syphilis