Erythrasma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Erythrasma
Erythrasma
Erythrasma is a long-term skin infection caused by a specific bacteria. It commonly occurs in skin folds.
Causes
Erythrasma is caused by the bacteria
Corynebacterium minutissimum
.
Erythrasma is more common in warm climates. You are more likely to develop this condition if you are overweight, older, or have
diabetes
.
Symptoms
The main symptoms are reddish-brown slightly scaly
patches
with sharp borders. They may itch slightly. The patches occur in moist areas such as the groin, armpit, and skin folds.
The patches often look similar to fungal infections, such as
ringworm
.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will check your skin and ask about the symptoms.
These tests can help diagnose erythrasma:
Lab tests of scrapings from the skin patch
Examination under a special lamp called a
Wood lamp
skin biopsy
Treatment
Your provider may suggest the following:
Gentle scrubbing of the skin patches with antibacterial soap
Antibiotic medicine applied to the skin
Antibiotics taken by mouth
Laser treatment
Outlook (Prognosis)
The condition should go away after treatment.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of erythrasma.
Prevention
You may be able to reduce the risk of erythrasma if you:
Bathe or shower often
Keep your skin dry
Wear clean clothes that absorb moisture
Avoid very hot or damp conditions
Maintain a healthy body weight
Images
Skin layers
References
Barkham MC, Khong B. Erythrasma. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Coulson IH, Murrell DF, eds.
Treatment of Skin Disease
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Limited; 2022:chap 77.
Dinulos JGH. Superficial fungal infections. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 13.
Review Date 10/14/2024
Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Skin Infections