Poinsettia plant exposure: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Poinsettia plant exposure
Poinsettia plant exposure
Poinsettia plants, commonly used during the holidays, are not poisonous. In most cases, eating this plant does not result in a trip to the hospital.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Diterpene esters
Where Found
Leaves, stem, sap of the poinsettia plant
Symptoms
Poinsettia plant exposure can affect many parts of the body.
EYES (IF DIRECT CONTACT OCCURS)
Burning
Redness
STOMACH AND INTESTINES (SYMPTOMS ARE MILD)
Nausea and vomiting
Stomach ache
SKIN
Skin rash and itching
Home Care
Take the following steps if a person is exposed to the plant.
Rinse the mouth out with water if leaves or stems were eaten.
Rinse eyes with water, if needed.
Wash the skin of any area that appears irritated with soap and water.
Before Calling Emergency
Seek medical help if the person has a severe reaction.
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as needed.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well the person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster the person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
This plant is not considered toxic. People most often make a full recovery.
DO NOT touch or eat any unfamiliar plant. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods.
Alternative Names
Christmas flower poisoning; Lobster plant poisoning; Painted leaf poisoning
References
Higgins T. Wild plant and mushroom poisoning. In: Higgins T, ed.
Medicine for the Outdoors
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:422-430.
Lim CS, Aks SE. Plants, herbal medications. and mushrooms. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 153.
McGovern TW. Dermatoses due to plants. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds.
Dermatology.
4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 17.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning