Gram-negative meningitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Gram-negative meningitis
Gram-negative meningitis
Meningitis
is an infection of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. This covering is called the meninges.
Bacteria are one type of germ that may cause meningitis. Gram-negative bacteria are a type of bacteria that behave in a similar manner in the body. They are called gram-negative because they turn pink when tested in the lab with a special stain called Gram stain.
Causes
Acute
bacterial meningitis can be caused by different Gram-negative bacteria including
meningococcus
and
H influenzae
.
This article covers Gram-negative meningitis caused by the following bacteria:
Escherichia coli
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Serratia marcescens
Gram-negative meningitis is more common in infants than adults. But it can also occur in adults, especially those with one or more risk factors. Risk factors in adults and children include:
Infection (especially in the abdomen or urinary tract)
Recent brain surgery
Recent injury to the head
Spinal abnormalities
Spinal fluid
shunt
placement after brain surgery
Urinary tract abnormalities
Urinary tract infection
Weakened immune system
Symptoms
Symptoms usually come on quickly, and may include:
Fever and chills
Mental status changes
Nausea and vomiting
Sensitivity to light (
photophobia
)
Severe headache
Stiff neck (meningismus)
Symptoms of a bladder, kidney, intestine, or lung infection
Other symptoms that can occur with this disease:
Agitation
Bulging fontanelles
in infants
Decreased consciousness
Poor feeding or irritability in children
Rapid breathing
Unusual posture, with the head and neck arched backwards (
opisthotonos
)
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Questions will focus on symptoms and possible exposure to someone who might have the same symptoms, such as a stiff neck and fever.
If your provider thinks meningitis is possible, a lumbar puncture (
spinal tap
) will likely be done to remove a sample of spinal fluid for testing.
Other tests that may be done include:
Blood culture
Chest x-ray
CT scan of the head
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Gram stain
or, other special stains, and
culture of the spinal fluid
Treatment
Antibiotics will be started as soon as possible. Ceftriaxone and cefepime are the most commonly used antibiotics for this type of meningitis. Other antibiotics may be given, depending on the type of bacteria.
If you have a spinal shunt, it may be removed.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The earlier treatment is started, the better the outcome.
Many people recover completely. But, many people have permanent brain damage or die of this type of meningitis. Young children and adults over age 50 have a higher risk for death. How well you do depends on:
Your age
How soon treatment is started
Your overall health
Possible Complications
Long-term complications may include:
Brain damage
Buildup of fluid between the skull and brain (
subdural effusion
)
Buildup of fluid inside the skull that leads to brain swelling (
hydrocephalus
)
Hearing loss
Seizures
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call 911 or the local emergency number or go to an emergency room if you suspect meningitis in a young child who has the following symptoms:
Feeding problems
High-pitched cry
Irritability
Persistent unexplained fever
Meningitis can quickly become a life-threatening illness.
Prevention
Prompt treatment of related infections may reduce the severity and complications of meningitis.
Images
Meninges of the brain
Meninges of the spine
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
CSF cell count
Gram stain
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Meningitis. About bacterial meningitis.
www.cdc.gov/meningitis/about/bacterial-meningitis.html
. Updated January 9, 2024. Accessed September 6, 2024.
Nath A. Meningitis: bacterial, viral, and other. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 381.
Hasbun R, Van de Beek D, Brouwer MC, Tunkel AR. Acute meningitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 87.
Review Date 8/29/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Meningitis