Arterial insufficiency: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Arterial insufficiency
Arterial insufficiency
Arterial insufficiency is any condition that slows or stops the flow of blood through your arteries. Arteries are blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to other places in your body.
Causes
One of the most common causes of arterial insufficiency is
atherosclerosis
or "hardening of the arteries." Fatty material (called plaque) builds up on the walls of your arteries. This causes them to become narrow and stiff. As a result, it is hard for blood to flow through your arteries.
Blood flow may be suddenly stopped due to a
blood clot
. Clots can form on the plaque or less often travel from another place such as the heart or other artery (also called embolus).
Symptoms
Symptoms depend on where your arteries become narrowed:
If it affects your heart arteries, you may have
chest pain
(angina pectoris) or a
heart attack
.
If it affects your brain arteries, you may have a transient ischemic attack (TIA) or
stroke
.
If it affects the arteries that bring blood to your legs, you may have frequent
leg cramping when you walk
called claudication.
If it affects the arteries in your belly area, you may have
pain after you eat
called abdominal angina (due to mesenteric ischemia).
Images
Arteries of the brain
Developmental process of atherosclerosis
References
Goodney PP. Clinical evaluation of the arterial system. In: Sidawy AN, Perler BA, eds.
Rutherford's Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 19.
Libby P. The vascular biology of atherosclerosis. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann, DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 24.
Review Date 11/19/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Atherosclerosis
Vascular Diseases