Testicle lump: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Testicle lump
Testicle lump
A testicle lump is swelling or a growth (mass) in one or both testicles.
Considerations
A testicle lump that does not hurt may be a sign of cancer. Most cases of
testicular cancer
occur in men ages 15 to 40. It can also occur at older or younger ages.
Causes
Possible causes of a painful scrotal mass include:
A cyst-like lump in the scrotum that contains fluid and dead sperm cells (spermatocele). (This condition sometimes does not cause pain.)
Epididymitis
.
Infection of the scrotal sac.
Injury or trauma.
Mumps
.
Orchitis
(testicular infection).
Testicular torsion
.
Testicular cancer.
Varicocele
.
Possible causes if the scrotal mass is not painful:
Loop of bowel from a
hernia
(this may or may not cause pain)
Hydrocele
Spermatocele
Testicular cancer
Varicocele
Cyst of the epididymis or testicle
Home Care
Starting in puberty, men at risk for testicular cancer may be taught to do regular exams of their testicles. This includes men with:
A family history of testicular cancer
A past tumor of the testicle
An undescended testicle, even if the testicle on the other side has descended
If you have a lump in your testicle, tell your health care provider right away. A lump on the testicle may be the first sign of testicular cancer. Many men with testicular cancer have been given a wrong diagnosis. Therefore, it is important to go back to your provider if you have a lump that doesn't go away.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider right away if you notice any unexplained lumps or any other changes in your testicles.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will examine you. This may include looking at and feeling (
palpating
) the testicles and
scrotum
. You will be asked questions about your health history and symptoms, such as:
When did you notice the lump?
Have you had any previous lumps?
Do you have any pain? Does the lump change in size?
Exactly where on the testicle is the lump? Is only one testicle involved?
Have you had any recent injuries or infections? Have you ever had surgery on your testicles or in the area?
What other symptoms do you have?
Is there
scrotal swelling
?
Do you have
abdominal pain
or lumps or swelling anywhere else?
Were you born with both testicles in the scrotum?
Tests and treatments depend on the results of the physical exam. A scrotal ultrasound may be done to find the cause of the swelling.
Alternative Names
Lump in the testicle; Scrotal mass
Images
Male reproductive anatomy
References
Di Carlo HN, Crigger CB. Disorders and anomalies of the scrotal contents. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.
22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 560.
Fadich A, Giorgianni SJ, Rovito MJ, et al. USPSTF testicular examination nomination-self-examinations and examinations in a clinical setting.
Am J Mens Health.
2018;12(5):1510-1516. PMID: 29717912
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29717912/
.
Palmer LS, Palmer JS. Management of abnormalities of the external genitalia in boys. In: Partin AW, Domochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology.
12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 44.
Stephenson AJ, Gilligan TD. Neoplasms of the testis. In: Partin AW, Domochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology.
12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 76.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Kelly L. Stratton, MD, FACS, Associate Professor, Department of Urology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Testicular Cancer
Testicular Disorders