Guttate psoriasis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Guttate psoriasis
Guttate psoriasis
Guttate psoriasis is a skin condition in which small, red, scaly, teardrop-shaped spots with silvery scale appear on the arms, legs, and middle of the body. Gutta means "drop" in Latin.
Causes
Guttate psoriasis is a type of
psoriasis
. Guttate psoriasis is usually seen in people younger than 30, especially in children. The condition often develops suddenly. It usually appears after an infection, most notably
strep throat
caused by group A streptococcus. Guttate psoriasis is not contagious. This means it can't spread to other people.
Psoriasis is a common disorder. The exact cause isn't known. But doctors think genes and the immune system are involved. Certain things can trigger an attack of symptoms.
With guttate psoriasis, in addition to strep throat, the following may trigger an attack:
Bacteria or viral infections, including upper respiratory infections
Injury to the skin, including cuts,
burns,
and
insect bites
Some medicines, including those used to treat malaria and certain heart conditions
Stress
Sunburn
Too much alcohol
Psoriasis may be severe in people who have a weakened immune system. This may include people who have:
HIV/AIDS
Autoimmune disorders
, including
rheumatoid arthritis
Chemotherapy
for cancer
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Itching
Spots on the skin that are pinkish-red and look like teardrops
Spots may be covered with silver, flaky skin called scales
Spots usually occur on the arms, legs, and middle of the body (the trunk), but may appear in other body areas
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will look at your skin. Diagnosis is usually based on what the spots look like.
Often, a person with guttate psoriasis has recently had a sore throat or upper respiratory infection.
Tests to confirm the diagnosis may include:
Skin biopsy
Throat culture
Blood tests for recent exposure to strep bacteria
Treatment
If you are recently infected, your provider may give you antibiotics.
Mild cases of guttate psoriasis are usually treated at home. Your provider may recommend any of the following:
Cortisone or other anti-itch and anti-inflammatory creams
Dandruff shampoos (over-the-counter or prescription)
Lotions that contain coal tar
Moisturizers
Prescription medicines that have vitamin D to apply to the skin (topically) or that have vitamin A (retinoids) to take by mouth (orally)
People with severe guttate psoriasis may receive medicines to suppress the body's immune response. These include cyclosporine and methotrexate. A newer group of medicines called biologics that alter parts of the immune system may also be used.
Your provider may suggest phototherapy. This is a medical procedure in which your skin is carefully exposed to ultraviolet light. Phototherapy may be given alone or after you take a medicine that makes the skin sensitive to light.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Guttate psoriasis may clear completely following treatment, especially phototherapy treatment. Sometimes, it may become a chronic (lifelong) condition, or worsen to the more common plaque-type psoriasis.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call your provider if you have symptoms of guttate psoriasis.
Alternative Names
Psoriasis - guttate; Group A streptococcus - guttate psoriasis; Strep throat - guttate psoriasis
Images
Psoriasis - guttate on the arms and chest
Psoriasis - guttate on the cheek
References
Dinulos JGH. Psoriasis and other papulosquamous diseases. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 8.
James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, recalcitrant palmoplantar eruptions, pustular dermatitis, and erythroderma. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin
. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 10.
Lebwohl MG, van de Kerkhof P. Psoriasis. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Coulson IH, Murrell DF, eds.
Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 210.
Review Date 5/31/2023
Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Psoriasis