Atypical pneumonia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Atypical pneumonia
Atypical pneumonia
Pneumonia is inflamed or swollen lung tissue due to infection with a germ.
With atypical pneumonia, the infection is caused by different bacteria than the more common ones that cause pneumonia. Atypical pneumonia also tends to have milder symptoms than typical pneumonia. It more often has symptoms that aren't just related to the lungs, including headache, low-grade fever, rash, joint pain, and stomach symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting.
Causes
Bacteria that cause atypical pneumonia include:
Pneumonia
caused by the bacteria
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
often affects people younger than age 40.
Pneumonia due to
Chlamydia pneumoniae
bacteria occurs year round.
Pneumonia due to
Legionella pneumophila
bacteria is seen more often in middle-aged and older adults, smokers, and those with chronic illnesses or a weak immune system. It can be more severe. This type of pneumonia is also called
Legionnaire disease
.
Symptoms
Pneumonia due to mycoplasma or chlamydia bacteria is usually mild. Pneumonia due to legionella gets worse during the first 4 to 6 days, and then improves over 4 to 5 days.
The most common symptoms of pneumonia are:
Chills
Cough (with legionella pneumonia, you may cough up bloody mucus)
Fever, which may be mild or high
Shortness of breath (may only occur when you exert yourself)
Other symptoms include:
Chest pain that gets worse when you breathe deeply or cough
Confusion, most often in older people or those with legionella pneumonia
Headache
Loss of appetite, low energy, and fatigue
Muscle aches and joint stiffness
Sweating and clammy skin
Less common symptoms include:
Diarrhea and vomiting (often with legionella pneumonia)
Ear pain (with mycoplasma pneumonia)
Eye pain or soreness (with mycoplasma pneumonia)
Neck lump (with mycoplasma pneumonia)
Rash (with mycoplasma pneumonia)
Sore throat (with mycoplasma pneumonia)
Exams and Tests
People with suspected pneumonia should have a complete medical evaluation. It may be hard for your health care provider to tell whether you have pneumonia,
bronchitis
, or another respiratory infection, so you may need a
chest x-ray
. The evaluation is similar for people who have more typical pneumonia.
Depending on how severe the symptoms are, other tests may be done, including:
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Blood tests to identify the specific bacteria
Bronchoscopy
in which a flexible tube with a lighted camera on the end is passed down to your lungs in selected cases (rarely needed)
CT scan of the chest
Measuring levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood (
arterial blood gases
)
Nose or throat swab to check for bacteria and viruses
Blood cultures
Open lung biopsy
(only done in very serious illnesses when the diagnosis cannot be made from other sources)
Sputum culture
to identify the specific bacteria
Urine test to check for legionella bacteria
Treatment
To feel better, you can take these self-care measures at home:
Regulate your fever with aspirin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs (such as ibuprofen or naproxen), or acetaminophen. Do not give aspirin to children because it may cause a dangerous illness called
Reye syndrome
.
Do not take cough medicines without first checking with your provider. Cough medicines may make it harder for your body to cough up the extra sputum.
Drink plenty of fluids to help loosen secretions and bring up phlegm.
Get a lot of rest. Have someone else do household chores.
If needed, you will be prescribed antibiotics.
You may be able to take antibiotics by mouth at home.
If your condition is severe, you will likely be admitted to a hospital. There, you will be given antibiotics through a vein (
intravenously
), as well as oxygen.
Antibiotics are usually prescribed for 3 to 5 days, although sometimes they may be used for 2 weeks or more.
Finish all the antibiotics you've been prescribed, even if you feel better. If you stop the medicine too soon, the pneumonia can return and may be harder to treat.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most people with pneumonia due to mycoplasma or chlamydia get better with the right antibiotics. Legionella pneumonia can be severe. It can lead to problems, most often in those with kidney failure, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or a weakened immune system. It can also lead to death.
Possible Complications
Complications that may result include any of the following:
Brain and nervous system infections, such as
meningitis
, myelitis, and
encephalitis
Hemolytic anemia
, a condition in which there are not enough red blood cells in the blood because the body is destroying them
Severe lung damage
Respiratory failure requiring breathing machine support (ventilator)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you develop fever, cough, or shortness of breath. There are many causes for these symptoms. The provider will need to check for pneumonia.
Also, contact your provider if you have been diagnosed with this type of pneumonia and your symptoms become worse after improving first.
Prevention
Wash your hands often and have other people around you do the same.
Avoid contact with sick people whenever possible.
If your immune system is weak, stay away from crowds. Ask visitors who have a cold to wear a mask.
Do not smoke. If you do, get help to quit.
Get appropriate vaccines like
flu
and
COVID-19
shot as prescribed. Ask your provider if you should get a pneumococcal vaccine (
pneumonia vaccine
).
Alternative Names
Walking pneumonia; Community-acquired pneumonia - atypical
Patient Instructions
Pneumonia in adults - discharge
Pneumonia in children - discharge
Images
Lungs
Respiratory system
References
Baden LR, Griffin MR, Klompas M. Overview of pneumonia. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024;chap 85.
Goldman DL. Mycoplasma infections. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 293.
Holzman RS, Simberkoff MS, Leaf HL. Mycoplasma pneumoniae and atypical pneumonia. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 183.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pneumonia