Factor VII assay: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Factor VII assay
Factor VII assay
The factor VII assay is a blood test to measure the activity of factor VII. This is one of the proteins in the body that helps the blood clot.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
You may need to temporarily stop taking some medicines before this test. Your health care provider will tell you which ones.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is used to find the cause of abnormal bleeding (decreased blood clotting). This decreased clotting may be caused by an abnormally low level of factor VII.
Normal Results
The normal value is 50% to 200% of the lab control or reference value.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Some labs use different measurements or may test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Decreased factor VII activity may be related to:
Factor VII deficiency
(a bleeding disorder that affects the ability of blood to clot). It can rarely be due to an inherited condition associated with a variant gene.
Disorder in which the proteins that regulate blood clotting become overactive (
disseminated intravascular coagulation
).
Fat
malabsorption
(not absorbing enough fat from your diet).
Liver disease
(such as
cirrhosis
).
Vitamin K
deficiency.
Taking certain blood thinners.
Risks
There is little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another, and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
This test is most often done on people who have
bleeding problems
. The risk of excessive bleeding is slightly greater than for people without bleeding problems.
Alternative Names
Stable factor; Proconvertin; Autoprothrombin I
References
Gailani D, Benjamin FT, Wheeler AP. Rare coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Pai M, Moffat KA. Laboratory evaluation of hemostatic and thrombotic disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 127.
Ragni MV. Coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA , eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 160.
Sarode R, Kessler CM. Coagulation and fibrinolysis. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 40.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bleeding Disorders