Culture - duodenal tissue: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Culture - duodenal tissue
Culture - duodenal tissue
A duodenal tissue culture is a laboratory exam to check a piece of tissue from the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). The test is to look for organisms that cause infection.
How the Test is Performed
A piece of tissue from the first part of the small intestine is taken during an upper endoscopy (
esophagogastroduodenoscopy
, also called an EGD).
The sample is then sent to a lab. There it is placed in a special dish (culture media) that allows bacteria or viruses to grow. The sample is looked at under a microscope regularly to see if any organisms are growing.
Organisms that grow on the culture are identified.
How to Prepare for the Test
This is a test done in a lab. The sample is collected during an EGD and biopsy procedure. Ask your health care provider how to prepare for this procedure.
Why the Test is Performed
A culture of duodenal tissue is done to check for bacteria or viruses that may lead to certain illnesses and conditions.
Normal Results
No harmful bacteria or viruses are found.
What Abnormal Results Mean
An abnormal finding means that harmful bacteria or a virus has been found in the tissue sample. Bacteria may include:
Campylobacter
Helicobacter pylori (H pylori)
Salmonella
Risks
Risks of this test include:
Bleeding
Perforation of (poking a hole in) the gastrointestinal tract by the scope
Infection
Some people may not be able to have this test because of other medical conditions.
Considerations
Other tests are very often done to look for infection-causing organisms in duodenal tissue. These tests include the urease test (for example, the CLO test) and histology (looking at the tissue under a microscope).
Routine culture for
H pylori
is not currently recommended.
Alternative Names
Duodenal tissue culture
Images
Duodenal tissue culture
References
Fritsche TR, Pritt BS. Medical parasitology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 63.
Lauwers GY, Mino-Kenudson M, Kradin RL. Infections of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Kradin RL, ed.
Diagnostic Pathology of Infectious Disease
. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 10.
McQuaid KR. Approach to the patient with gastrointestinal disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 118.
Siddiqi HA, Rabinowitz S, Axiotis CA. Laboratory diagnosis of gastrointestinal and pancreatic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 23.
Review Date 6/11/2024
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Aria - Jefferson Health Torresdale, Jefferson Digestive Diseases Network, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bacterial Infections
Biopsy
Peptic Ulcer
Small Intestine Disorders