Nitroblue tetrazolium blood test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Nitroblue tetrazolium blood test
Nitroblue tetrazolium blood test
The nitroblue tetrazolium test checks if certain immune system cells can change a colorless chemical called nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) into a deep blue color.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
The chemical NBT is added to the white blood cells in the lab. The cells are then examined under a microscope to see if the chemical has made them turn blue.
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is needed.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is done to screen for
chronic granulomatous disease
. This disorder is passed down in families. In people who have this disease, certain immune cells do not help protect the body from infections.
Health care providers may order this test for people who have frequent infections in the bones, skin, joints, lungs, and other parts of the body.
Normal Results
Normally, the white blood cells turn blue when NBT is added. This means that the cells should be able to kill bacteria and protect the person from infections.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly from one lab to another. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
If the sample does not change color when NBT is added, the white blood cells are missing the substance needed to kill bacteria. This may be due to chronic granulomatous disease.
Risks
There is little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma
(blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Alternative Names
NBT test
Images
Nitroblue tetrazolium test
References
Priel DL, Kuhns DB. Assessment of neutrophil function. In: Rich RR, Fleisher TA, Schroeder HW, Weyand CM, Corry DB, Puck JM, eds.
Clinical Immunology: Principles and Practice
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 94.
Tosi MF. Normal and impaired immunologic responses to infection. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.
Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 2.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Frank D. Brodkey, MD, FCCM, Associate Professor, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Immune System and Disorders