Dementia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Dementia
Dementia
Dementia is a loss of brain function that occurs with certain diseases. It affects one or more brain functions such as memory, thinking, language, judgment, or behavior. Dementia may also be referred to as major
neurocognitive disorder
.
Causes
Dementia usually occurs in older age. Most types are rare in people under age 60. The risk of dementia increases as a person gets older.
Most types of dementia are nonreversible and degenerative. Nonreversible means the changes in the brain that are causing the dementia cannot be stopped or turned back.
Alzheimer disease
is the most common type of dementia.
Another common type of dementia is
vascular dementia
. It is caused by poor blood flow to the brain, such as with stroke.
Lewy body disease is another cause of dementia in older adults. People with this condition have abnormal protein structures in certain areas of the brain. Any condition that results in injury to the brain can cause dementia.
The following medical conditions can also lead to dementia:
Huntington disease
Brain injury
Frontotemporal degeneration
(Pick disease)
Multiple sclerosis
Infections such as HIV/AIDS,
syphilis
, and
Lyme disease
Parkinson disease
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Excess alcohol use
Brain trauma
Some causes of dementia, such as those due to
abnormal chemical processes in the body
, may be stopped or reversed if they are found soon enough, including:
Brain injury
Brain tumors
Long-term (chronic) alcohol abuse
Changes in blood sugar, sodium, and calcium levels
Low
vitamin B12
level
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Use of certain medicines, including cimetidine and some cholesterol medicines
Some brain infections
Symptoms
Dementia symptoms include difficulty with many areas of mental function, including:
Emotional behavior or personality
Language
Memory
Perception
Thinking and judgment (cognitive skills)
Dementia usually first appears as forgetfulness.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a condition in which a person has more memory and thinking problems than other people their age. People with MCI have mild problems with thinking and memory that do not interfere with daily activities. They often know about their forgetfulness. Not everyone with MCI develops dementia.
Symptoms of MCI include:
Difficulty doing more than one task at a time
Difficulty solving problems or making decisions
Forgetting names of familiar people, recent events, or conversations
Taking longer to do more difficult mental activities
Early symptoms of dementia can include:
Difficulty with tasks that take some thought, but that used to come easily, such as balancing a checkbook, playing games (such as bridge), and learning new information or routines
Getting lost on familiar routes
Language problems, such as trouble with the names of familiar objects
Losing interest in things previously enjoyed, flat mood
Misplacing items
Personality changes and loss of social skills, which can lead to inappropriate behaviors
Mood changes leading to aggressive behavior
Poor performance of job duties
As dementia becomes worse, symptoms are more obvious and interfere with the ability to take care of oneself. Symptoms may include:
Change in sleep patterns, often waking up at night
Difficulty with basic tasks, such as preparing meals, choosing proper clothing, or driving
Forgetting details about current events
Wandering and getting lost
Forgetting events in one's own life history, or losing self-awareness
Having
hallucinations
, arguments, striking out, and violent behavior
Having delusions,
depression
, and agitation
More difficulty reading or writing
Poor judgment and loss of ability to recognize danger
Using the wrong word, not pronouncing words correctly, speaking in confusing sentences
Withdrawing from social contact
People with severe dementia can no longer:
Perform basic activities of daily living, such as eating, dressing, and bathing
Recognize family members
Understand language
Other symptoms that may occur with dementia:
Problems controlling bowel movements or urine
Swallowing problems
Exams and Tests
A skilled health care provider can often diagnose dementia using the following:
Complete physical exam, including nervous system exam
Asking about the person's medical history and symptoms
Mental function tests (mental status examination)
Neuropsychological testing
Other tests may be ordered to find out if other problems may be causing dementia or making it worse. These conditions include:
Anemia
Brain tumor
Long-term (chronic) infection
Intoxication from medicines
Severe depression
Thyroid disease
Vitamin deficiency
The following tests and procedures may be done:
B12 level
Blood ammonia level
Blood chemistry
(chem-20)
Blood gas analysis
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
Drug or alcohol levels
(toxicology screen)
Electroencephalograph
(EEG)
Head CT
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
Mental status test
Neuropsychological test
MRI of head
Thyroid function tests
, including
thyroid stimulating hormone
(TSH)
Urinalysis
Genetic tests
PET scan
Treatment
Treatment depends on the condition causing the dementia. Some people may need to stay in the hospital for a short time.
Sometimes, medicines given for any condition, including dementia, can make a person's confusion worse. Stopping or changing these medicines is part of the treatment.
Certain mental exercises can help with dementia.
Treating conditions that can lead to dementia symptoms often greatly improve mental function. Such conditions include:
Anemia
Decreased blood oxygen (hypoxia)
Depression
Heart failure
Infections
Nutritional disorders
Thyroid disorders
Medicines may be used to:
Slow the rate at which symptoms get worse, though improvement with these medicines may be small
Control problems with behavior, such as loss of judgment or confusion
Newer treatments can reduce levels of amyloid in the brains of people with Alzheimer disease. While they offer hope, they haven't been proven to slow the disease.
Someone with dementia will need
support in the home
as the condition gets worse. Family members or other caregivers can assist by helping the person cope with
memory loss
and
behavior and sleep problems
. It is important to make sure the homes of people who have dementia are
safe for them
.
Outlook (Prognosis)
People with MCI do not always develop dementia. When dementia does occur, it usually gets worse over time. Dementia often decreases quality of life and lifespan. Families will likely need to plan for their loved one's
future care
. The prognosis depends on the underlying cause. Some dementias rapidly progress to death while others can take years to get worse.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
Dementia symptoms develop or a sudden
change in mental status
occurs
The condition of a person with dementia gets worse
You are unable to care for a person with dementia at home
Prevention
Most causes of dementia are not preventable.
The risk of vascular dementia may be reduced by preventing strokes through:
Eating healthy foods
Exercising
Quitting smoking
Controlling high blood pressure
Managing
diabetes
Alternative Names
Lewy body dementia; DLB; Vascular dementia; Mild cognitive impairment; MCI; Alzheimer disease - dementia
Patient Instructions
Communicating with someone with aphasia
Communicating with someone with dysarthria
Dementia and driving
Dementia - behavior and sleep problems
Dementia - daily care
Dementia - keeping safe in the home
Dementia - what to ask your doctor
Eating extra calories when sick - adults
Preventing falls
Images
Brain
Arteries of the brain
References
Budson AE, Solomon PR. Evaluating the patient with memory loss or dementia. In: Budson AE, Solomon PR, eds.
Memory Loss, Alzheimer's Disease, and Dementia
. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 2.
Knopman DS. Cognitive impairment and dementia. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 371.
Peterson R, Graff-Radford J. Alzheimer disease and other dementias. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 95.
Petersen RC, Lopez O, Armstrong MJ, et al. Practice guideline update summary: mild cognitive impairment: report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Neurology.
2018;90(3):126-135. PMID: 29282327
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29282327/
.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Dementia