Pityriasis alba: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pityriasis alba
Pityriasis alba
Pityriasis alba is a common skin disorder that causes patches of light-colored (hypopigmented) areas.
Causes
The cause is unknown but may be linked to
atopic dermatitis
(eczema). The disorder is most common in children and teens. It is more noticeable in children with dark skin.
Symptoms
The problem areas on the skin (lesions) often start as slightly red and scaly patches that are round or oval. They usually appear on the face, upper arms, neck, and upper middle of the body. After these lesions go away, the patches turn light-colored (hypopigmented).
The patches do not tan easily. Because of this, they may get red quickly in the sun. As the skin surrounding the patches darkens normally, the patches may become more visible.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider can usually diagnose the condition by looking at the skin. Tests, such as potassium hydroxide (
KOH
), may be done to check for other skin problems. In very rare cases, a
skin biopsy
is done.
Treatment
Your provider may recommend the following treatments:
Moisturizer
Mild steroid creams
Medicine, called immunomodulators, applied to the skin to reduce inflammation
Treatment with ultraviolet light to control the inflammation
Medicines by mouth or shots to control the dermatitis, if severe
Laser treatment
Outlook (Prognosis)
Pityriasis alba usually goes away on its own with patches returning to normal pigment over many months.
Possible Complications
Patches may get sunburned when exposed to sunlight. Applying sunscreen and using other sun protection can help prevent sunburn.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if your child has patches of hypopigmented skin.
Images
Atopic dermatitis
References
Dinulos JGH. Light-related diseases and disorders of pigmentation. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 19.
Patterson JW. Disorders of pigmentation. In: Patterson JW, ed.
Weedon's Skin Pathology
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 11.
Review Date 5/31/2023
Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Skin Pigmentation Disorders