Yawning - excessive: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Yawning - excessive
Yawning - excessive
Yawning is involuntarily opening the mouth and taking a long, deep breath of air. This is most often done when you are tired or sleepy. Excessive yawning that happens more often than expected, even if
drowsiness
or
weariness
is present is considered excessive yawning.
Causes
Causes may include:
Drowsiness or weariness
Disorders associated with excessive daytime sleepiness
Vasovagal reaction (stimulation of a nerve called the vagus nerve), caused by
heart attack
or
aortic dissection
Brain problems such as
tumor
,
stroke
,
epilepsy
,
multiple sclerosis
Certain medicines (rare)
Problem with the body's temperature control (rare)
Home Care
Follow the treatment for the underlying cause.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if:
You have unexplained and excessive yawning.
The yawning is associated with being very sleepy in the daytime.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The provider will take your medical history and do a physical exam.
You may be asked questions such as:
When did the excessive yawning begin?
How many times do you yawn per hour or day?
Is it worse in the morning, after lunch, or during exercise?
Is it worse in certain areas or certain rooms?
Does yawning interfere with normal activities?
Is the increased yawning related to the amount of sleep you get?
Is it related to use of medicines?
Is it related to activity level or boredom?
Do things such as rest or breathing deeply help?
What other symptoms are present?
You may need tests to look for medical problems that are causing the yawning.
Your provider will recommend treatment, if needed based on the results of your exam and tests.
Alternative Names
Excessive yawning
References
Avidan AY. Sleep and its disorders. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 101.
Rucker JC, Seay MD. Cranial neuropathies. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 103.
Teive HAG, Munhoz RP, Camargo CHF, Walusinski O. Yawning in neurology: a review.
Arq Neuropsiquiatr
. 2018;76(7):473-480. PMID: 30066799
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30066799/
.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.