Vaginal cancer: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Vaginal cancer
Vaginal cancer
Vaginal cancer is cancer of the vagina, a female reproductive organ.
Causes
Most vaginal cancers occur when another cancer, such as
cervical
, vulvar, or
endometrial cancer
, spreads. This is called secondary vaginal cancer.
Cancer that starts in the vagina is called primary vaginal cancer. This type of cancer is rare. Most primary vaginal cancers start in skin-like cells called squamous cells. This cancer is known as squamous cell carcinoma. The other types include:
Adenocarcinoma
Melanoma
Sarcoma
The cause of squamous cell carcinoma of the vagina is unknown. But a history of cervical cancer is common in women with squamous cell carcinoma of the vagina. So it may be associated with
human papilloma virus
(HPV) infection.
Most women with squamous cell cancer of the vagina are over 50.
Adenocarcinoma of the vagina tends to affect younger women. The average age at which this cancer is diagnosed is 19. Women whose mothers took the medicine diethylstilbestrol (DES) to prevent
miscarriages
during the first 3 months of pregnancy are more likely to develop vaginal adenocarcinoma.
Sarcoma of the vagina is a rare cancer that mainly occurs in infancy and early childhood.
Symptoms
Symptoms of vaginal cancer can include any of the following:
Bleeding after having sex
Painless vaginal bleeding and discharge not due to a normal period
Pain in the pelvis or vagina
Some women have no symptoms.
Exams and Tests
In women with no symptoms, the cancer may be found during a routine pelvic exam and
Pap test
.
Other tests to diagnose vaginal cancer include:
Biopsy
Colposcopy
Other tests that may be done to check if the cancer has spread include:
Chest x-ray
CT scan
and
MRI
of the abdomen and pelvis
PET scan
Other tests that may be done to know the stage of the vaginal cancer include:
Cystoscopy
Barium enema
Intravenous urography
(x-ray of kidney, ureters and bladder using contrast material)
Treatment
Treatment of vaginal cancer depends on:
The type of cancer
How far the disease has spread
Surgery is sometimes used if the cancer is small and located at the upper part of the vagina. Most women are treated with
radiation
. If the tumor is cervical cancer that has spread to the vagina, radiation and
chemotherapy
are both given.
Sarcoma may be treated with a combination of chemotherapy, surgery, and radiation.
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a
support group
whose members share common experiences and problems.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook for women with vaginal cancer depends on the size and the stage of disease and the specific type of tumor.
Possible Complications
Vaginal cancer may spread to other areas of the body. Complications can occur from radiation, surgery, and chemotherapy.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider for an appointment if:
You notice bleeding after sex
You have persistent vaginal bleeding or discharge
Prevention
There are no definite ways to prevent this cancer.
The
HPV vaccine
is approved to help prevent cervical cancer. This vaccine may also decrease the risk of getting some other HPV-associated cancers, such as vaginal cancer. You can increase your chance of early detection by getting regular pelvic examinations and Pap smears.
Alternative Names
Vaginal cancer; Cancer - vagina; Tumor - vaginal
Images
Female reproductive anatomy
Uterus
References
Frumovitz M. Neoplastic diseases of the vulva and vagina. . In: Gershenson DM, Lentz GM, Valea FA, Lobo RA, eds.
Comprehensive Gynecology.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 30.
Jhingran A, Russell AH, Seiden MV, et al. Cancers of the cervix, vulva, and vagina. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology.
6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 84.
PDQ Adult Treatment Editorial Board. Vaginal Cancer Treatment (PDQ): Health Professional Version. 2024 Feb 16. In:
PDQ Cancer Information Summaries
[Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Cancer Institute (US); 2002. PMID: 26389242
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26389242/
.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Howard Goodman, MD, Gynecologic Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, West Palm Beach, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Vaginal Cancer