Ganglioneuroma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Ganglioneuroma
Ganglioneuroma
Ganglioneuroma is a tumor of the autonomic nervous system.
Causes
Ganglioneuromas are rare tumors that most often start in autonomic nerve cells. Autonomic nerves manage body functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, sweating, bowel and bladder emptying, and digestion. The tumors are usually noncancerous (
benign
).
Ganglioneuromas usually occur in people over 10 years of age. They grow slowly, and may release certain chemicals or hormones.
There are no known risk factors. However, the tumors may be associated with some genetic problems, such as
neurofibromatosis type 1
.
Symptoms
A ganglioneuroma usually causes no symptoms. The tumor is only discovered when a person is examined or treated for another condition.
Symptoms depend on the location of the tumor and the type of chemicals it releases.
If the tumor is in the chest area (mediastinum), symptoms may include:
Breathing difficulty
Chest pain
Compression of the windpipe (trachea)
If the tumor is lower down in the abdomen in the area called the retroperitoneal space, symptoms may include:
Abdominal or back pain
Bloating
If the tumor is near the spinal cord, it may cause:
Compression of the spinal cord, which leads to pain and loss of strength or feeling in the legs, arms, or both
Spine deformity
These tumors may produce certain hormones, which can cause the following symptoms:
Diarrhea
High blood pressure
Increased body hair
Exams and Tests
The best tests to identify a ganglioneuroma are:
CT scan
of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis
MRI scan
of the chest and abdomen
Ultrasound of the abdomen or pelvis
Blood and urine tests may be done to determine if the tumor is producing hormones or other chemicals.
biopsy
or complete removal of the tumor may be needed to confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment
Treatment involves surgery to remove the tumor (if it is causing symptoms).
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most ganglioneuromas are noncancerous. The expected outcome is usually good.
Possible Complications
If the tumor has been present for a long time and has pressed on the spinal cord or caused other symptoms, surgery to remove the tumor may not reverse the damage. Compression of the spinal cord may result in loss of movement (paralysis), especially if the cause is not detected promptly.
Surgery to remove the tumor may also lead to complications in some cases. In rare cases, problems due to compression may occur even after the tumor is removed.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you or your child has symptoms that may be caused by this type of tumor.
Images
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
References
Goldblum JR, Folpe AL, Weiss SW. Benign tumors of peripheral nerves. In: Goldblum JR, Folpe AL, Weiss SW, eds.
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 26.
Kaidar-Person O, Zagar T, Haithcock BE, Weiss J. Diseases of the pleura and mediastinum. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 70.
Kutikov A, Crispen PL, Uzzo RG. Pathophysiology, evaluation, and medical management of adrenal disorders. In: Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 106.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Benign Tumors
Peripheral Nerve Disorders