Psittacosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Psittacosis
Psittacosis
Psittacosis is an infection caused by
Chlamydia psittaci,
a type of bacteria found in the droppings of birds. Birds spread the infection to humans.
Causes
Psittacosis infection develops when you breathe in (inhale) the bacteria. While anyone can get psittacosis, it is more common in adults.
People at high risk for this disease include:
Bird owners
Pet shop employees
People who work in poultry processing plants
Veterinarians
Typical birds involved are parrots, parakeets, and budgerigars, although other birds have also caused the disease.
Psittacosis is a rare disease. Very few cases are reported each year in the United States.
Symptoms
The incubation period of psittacosis is 5 to 15 days. The incubation period is the time it takes for symptoms to appear after being exposed to the bacteria.
Symptoms may include:
Blood-tinged sputum
Dry
cough
Fatigue
Fever
and chills
Headache
Joint aches
Muscle aches
(most often in the head and neck)
Shortness of breath
Diarrhea
Swelling in the back of the throat (pharyngitis)
Inflammation of the liver
Confusion
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will hear abnormal lung sounds such as crackles and decreased breath sounds when listening to the chest with a stethoscope.
Tests that may be done include:
Antibody titer
(rising titer over time is a sign of infection)
Blood culture
Sputum culture
X-ray of the chest
Complete blood count
(CBC)
CT scan of the chest
Treatment
The infection is treated with antibiotics. Doxycycline is used first. Other antibiotics that may be given include:
Macrolides
Fluoroquinolones
Other tetracycline antibiotics
Note
: Tetracycline and doxycycline by mouth are usually not given to children until after all their permanent teeth have started to grow in, because they can permanently discolor teeth that are still forming. These medicines are also not given to pregnant women. Other antibiotics are used in these situations.
Outlook (Prognosis)
A full recovery is expected if you do not have any other conditions that affect your health.
Possible Complications
Complications of psittacosis may include:
Brain involvement
Decreased lung function as a result of the pneumonia
Heart valve infection  (
endocarditis
)
Inflammation of the liver (
hepatitis
)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Antibiotics are needed to treat this infection. If you develop symptoms of psittacosis, contact your provider.
Prevention
Avoid exposure to birds that may carry these bacteria, such as parrots. Medical problems that lead to a weak immune system increase your risk for this disease and should be treated appropriately.
Alternative Names
Ornithosis; Parrot pneumonia
Images
Lungs
Respiratory system
References
Reno HEL, Geisler WM. Diseases caused by chlamydiae. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 294.
Schlossberg D. Psittacosis (due to
Chlamydia psittaci
). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
Schlossberg D. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 181.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Animal Diseases and Your Health
Bacterial Infections