Hydroxyzine overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hydroxyzine overdose
Hydroxyzine overdose
Hydroxyzine is an antihistamine available only with a prescription. It is used to treat symptoms of
allergies
and motion sickness.
Hydroxyzine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an
overdose
, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Hydroxyzine can be harmful in large amounts.
Where Found
Hydroxyzine is found in medicines with these names:
Durrax
Rezine
Vistaril
Multipax
Other medicines may also contain hydroxyzine.
Symptoms
Dilated pupils are the classic symptom of a hydroxyzine overdose. Below are other symptoms of a hydroxyzine overdose in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Shortness of breath
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Difficulty urinating
EYES, EARS, NOSE, THROAT, AND MOUTH
Blurred vision
Dry mouth
Enlarged pupils
Dry eyes
Ringing in the ears
HEART AND BLOOD
Rapid heartbeat
Low blood pressure
Pounding heartbeat (
palpitations
)
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Coma
(decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness)
Seizures
Delirium
Depression
Disorientation
Dizziness
Drowsiness
Hallucinations
(seeing or hearing things that aren't there)
Nervousness
Sleeping difficulties
Tremor
Uncoordinated movement
Unsteadiness
SKIN
Dry, red, or
flushed skin
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Nausea
Vomiting
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Activated charcoal
Laxative
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a breathing machine (
ventilator
)
Outlook (Prognosis)
Recovery is likely if the person survives the first 24 hours. Complications such as pneumonia, muscle damage from lying on a hard surface for a prolonged period of time, or brain damage from lack of oxygen may cause permanent disability. Few people actually die from an antihistamine overdose, unless they have serious heart rhythm disturbances or breathing problems.
Keep all medicines in child-proof bottles and out of reach of children.
Alternative Names
Vistaril overdose
Images
Allergies
References
Aronson JK. Anticholinergic drugs. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:534-539.
Hoppe JA, Monte AA. Anticholinergics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 140.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cold and Cough Medicines