Memory loss: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Memory loss
Memory loss
Memory loss is unusual forgetfulness. You may not be able to remember new events, recall one or more memories of the past, or both.
The memory loss may be for a short time and then resolve (transient). Or, it may not go away, and, depending on the cause, it can get worse over time.
In severe cases, such memory impairment may interfere with daily living activities.
Causes
Normal aging can cause some forgetfulness. It is normal to have some trouble learning new material or needing more time to remember it. But normal aging does not lead to dramatic memory loss. Such memory loss is due to other diseases.
Memory loss can be caused by many things. To determine a cause, your health care provider will ask if the problem came on suddenly or slowly.
Many areas of the brain help you create and retrieve memories. A problem in any of these areas can lead to memory loss.
Memory loss may result from a new injury to the brain, which is caused by or is present after:
Brain tumor
Cancer treatment, such as
brain radiation
,
bone marrow transplant
, or
chemotherapy
Concussion
or head trauma
Not enough oxygen getting to the brain when your heart or breathing is stopped for too long
Severe
brain infection
or
infection around the brain
Major surgery or severe illness, including brain surgery
Sudden, temporary loss of memory (transient global amnesia) of unclear cause
Transient ischemic attack (TIA)
or
stroke
Fluid collection in the brain (
hydrocephalus
)
Multiple sclerosis
Dementia
Sometimes, memory loss occurs with mental health problems, such as:
After a major, traumatic or stressful event
Bipolar disorder
Depression
or other mental health disorders, such as
schizophrenia
Memory loss may be a sign of dementia. Dementia also affects thinking, language, judgment, and behavior. Common types of dementia associated with memory loss are:
Alzheimer disease
Vascular dementia
Lewy body dementia
Fronto-temporal dementia
Progressive supranuclear palsy
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Other causes of memory loss include:
Alcohol or use of prescription or illegal drugs
Brain infections such as
Lyme disease
,
syphilis
, or HIV/AIDS
Overuse of medicines, such as barbiturates, opioids or
hypnotics
Electroconvulsive therapy
(ECT) most often causes short-term memory loss
Epilepsy
that is not well controlled
Illness that results in the loss of, or damage to brain tissue or nerve cells, such as
Parkinson disease
,
Huntington disease
, or multiple sclerosis
Low levels of important nutrients or vitamins, such as low vitamin B1 or
B12
Home Care
A person with memory loss needs a lot of support.
It helps to show the person familiar objects, music, or and photos or play familiar music.
It is important to write down when the person should take any medicine or do other critical tasks.
If a person needs help with everyday tasks, or if safety or nutrition is a concern, you may want to consider extended-care facilities, such as a nursing home.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask about the person's medical history and symptoms. This will usually include asking questions of family members and friends. For this reason, they may be interviewed in-person or by phone.
Medical history questions may include:
Type of memory loss, such as short-term or long-term
Time pattern, such as how long the memory loss has lasted or whether it comes and goes
Things that triggered memory loss, such as head injury or surgery
Tests that may be done include:
Blood tests for specific diseases that are suspected (such as low vitamin B12 or thyroid disease)
Cerebral angiography
Cognitive tests
(neuropsychological/psychometric tests)
CT scan
or
MRI of the head
Electroencephalogram
(EEG)
Lumbar puncture
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
Genetic tests
Treatment depends on the cause of memory loss. Your provider can tell you more.
Alternative Names
Forgetfulness; Amnesia; Impaired memory; Loss of memory; Amnestic syndrome; Dementia - memory loss; Mild cognitive impairment - memory loss
Images
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
Brain
References
Kirshner HS, Gifford KA. Intellectual and memory impairments. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 7.
Oyebode F. Disturbance of memory. In: Oyebode F, ed.
Sims' Symptoms in the Mind: Textbook of Descriptive Psychopathology.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 5.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Memory