Tropical sprue: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Tropical sprue
Tropical sprue
Tropical sprue is a condition that occurs in people who live in or visit tropical areas for extended periods of time. It impairs nutrients from being absorbed from the intestines.
Tropical sprue (TS) is a syndrome characterized by acute or chronic diarrhea, weight loss, and
malabsorption
of nutrients.
Causes
This disease is caused by damage to the lining of the small intestine. It comes from having too much of certain types of bacteria in the intestines.
Risk factors are:
Living in the tropics
Long periods of travel to tropical destinations
Symptoms
Symptoms include:
Abdominal cramps
Diarrhea, worse on a high-fat diet
Excess gas (flatus)
Fatigue
Fever
Leg swelling
Weight loss
Symptoms may not appear for up to 10 years after leaving the tropics.
Exams and Tests
There is no clear marker or test that clearly diagnoses this problem.
Certain tests help to confirm that poor absorption of nutrients is present:
D-xylose test to see how well the intestines absorb a simple sugar
Tests of the stool to see if fat is absorbed correctly
Blood tests to measure iron, folate,
vitamin B12
, or vitamin D
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Tests that examine the small intestine may include:
Enteroscopy
Upper endoscopy
Biopsy of the small intestine
Upper GI series
Treatment
Treatment begins with plenty of fluids and electrolytes. Replacement of folate, iron, vitamin B12, and other nutrients may also be needed. Antibiotic therapy with tetracycline or trimethoprim with sulfamethoxazole is typically given for 3 to 6 months.
In most cases, oral tetracycline is not prescribed for children until after all the permanent teeth have come in. This medicine can permanently discolor teeth that are still forming. However, other antibiotics can be used.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome is good with treatment.
Possible Complications
Vitamin and mineral deficiencies are common.
In children, sprue leads to:
Delay in the maturing of bones (skeletal maturation)
Growth failure
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if:
Tropical sprue symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment.
You develop new symptoms.
You have diarrhea or other symptoms of this disorder for a long period of time, especially after spending time in the tropics.
Prevention
Other than avoiding living in or traveling to tropical climates, there is no known prevention for tropical sprue.
Images
Digestive system
Digestive system organs
References
Ramakrishna BS. Tropical diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 108.
Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 126.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Aria - Jefferson Health Torresdale, Jefferson Digestive Diseases Network, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Malabsorption Syndromes