Delayed puberty in boys: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Delayed puberty in boys
Delayed puberty in boys
Delayed puberty in boys is when puberty does not begin by 14 years of age.
When puberty is delayed, these changes either don't occur or don't progress normally. Delayed puberty is more common in boys than in girls.
Causes
In most cases, delayed puberty is simply a matter of growth changes beginning later than usual, sometimes called late bloomer. Once puberty begins, it progresses normally. This is called constitutional delayed puberty, and it runs in families. This is the most common cause of late maturity.
Delayed puberty also may occur when the testes produce too little or no male hormones. This is called
hypogonadism
.
This can occur when the testes are damaged or are not developing as they should.
It can also occur if there's a problem in
parts of the brain involved in puberty
.
Certain medical conditions or treatments can lead to hypogonadism:
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
Underactive thyroid gland
Diabetes mellitus
Cystic fibrosis
Sickle cell disease
Liver and kidney disease
Anorexia nervosa
(uncommon in boys)
Autoimmune diseases
, such as Hashimoto thyroiditis or Addison disease
Chemotherapy
or radiation cancer treatment
A tumor in the pituitary gland
Klinefelter syndrome
, a genetic disorder
Absence of testes at birth (
anorchia
)
Injury or trauma to the testicles due to
testicular torsion
Symptoms
Boys begin puberty between ages 9 and 14 and complete it in 3.5 to 4 years.
Puberty changes
occur when the body starts making male sex hormones. The following changes normally begin to appear in boys between ages 9 to 14:
Testicles and penis get bigger
Hair grows on the face, chest, legs, arms, other body parts, and around the genitals
Height and weight increase
Voice gets deeper
When puberty is delayed:
Testicles are smaller than 1 inch by age 14
Penis is small and immature by age 13
There is very little body hair or almost none by age 15
Voice remains high-pitched
Body stays short and thin
Fat deposits may occur around the hips, pelvis, abdomen, and breasts
Delayed puberty may also cause stress in the child.
Exams and Tests
Your child's health care provider will take a family history to know if delayed puberty runs in the family. The provider will perform a physical exam. Tests may include:
Blood test to check for levels of certain growth hormones, sex hormones, and thyroid hormones
LH response to GnRH blood test
Chromosomal analysis
or other genetic testing
MRI of head for tumors
Ultrasound of the pelvis or testicles
An x-ray of the left hand and wrist to evaluate bone age may be obtained at the initial visit to see if the bones are maturing. It may be repeated over time, if needed.
Treatment
The treatment will depend on the cause of delayed puberty.
If there is a family history of late puberty, often no treatment is needed. In time, puberty will begin on its own.
If delayed puberty is due to a disease, such as underactive thyroid gland, treating it may help puberty to develop normally.
Hormone therapy may help start puberty if:
Puberty fails to develop
The child is very distressed because of the delay
The provider will give a shot (injection) of testosterone (male sex hormone) in the muscle every 4 weeks. Growth changes will be monitored. The provider will increase the dose slowly until puberty is reached.
Support Groups
More information and support to understand more about your child's growth can be found at:
The MAGIC Foundation -
www.magicfoundation.org
Outlook (Prognosis)
Delayed puberty that runs in the family will resolve itself.
Treatment with male sex hormones can trigger puberty. Hormones can also be given if needed to improve fertility.
Possible Complications
A low level of sex hormones may cause:
Erection problems
(impotence)
Infertility
Low bone density and fractures later in life (osteoporosis)
Weakness
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
Your child shows a slow growth rate
Puberty does not begin by 14 years of age
Puberty begins, but does not progress normally
A referral to a pediatric endocrinologist may be recommended for boys with delayed puberty.
Alternative Names
Delayed sexual development - boys; Pubertal delay - boys; Hypogonadism
References
Allan CA, McLachlan RI. Androgen deficiency disorders. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, de Kretser DM, et al, eds.
Endocrinology: Adult and Pediatric
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2016:chap 139.
Escobar O, Gurtunca N, Viswanathan P, Witchel SF. Pediatric endocrinology. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, Garrison J, eds.
Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 9.
Garibaldi LR, Chemaitilly W. Disorders of pubertal development. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 600.
Haddad NG, Eugster EA. Endocrinology of pubertal disorders. In: Robertson RP, ed.
DeGroot's Endocrinology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 103.
Pitteloud N, Papadakis GE, Jacobs AN. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 23.
Sanii YE, Rosenfeld A. Adolescent medicine. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
The Harriet Lane Handbook : The Johns Hopkins Hospital
. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 5.
Review Date 7/31/2024
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Puberty