Fingers that change color : MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Fingers that change color
Fingers that change color
Fingers or toes may change color when they are exposed to cold temperatures or stress, or when there is a problem with their blood supply.
Causes
These conditions can cause fingers or toes to change color:
Buerger disease
Chilblains (painful inflammation of small blood vessels)
Cryoglobulinemia
Frostbite
Necrotizing vasculitis
Peripheral artery disease
Raynaud phenomenon
(sudden change in the finger color ranges from pale to red to blue)
Scleroderma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Home Care
Things you can do to help prevent this problem include:
Avoid smoking.
Avoid exposure to cold in any form.
Wear mittens or gloves outdoors and when handling ice or frozen food.
Avoid getting chilled, which may happen following any active recreational sport or other physical activity.
Wear comfortable, roomy shoes and wool socks.
When outside, always wear shoes.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if:
Your fingers change color and the cause is not known.
Your fingers or toes turn black or the skin breaks.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will perform a
physical exam
, which will include close examination of your hands, arms, and fingers.
Your provider will ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, including:
Did your fingers or toes suddenly change color?
Has the color change occurred before?
Does the cold or changes in your emotions cause your fingers or toes to turn white or blue?
Did the skin color changes occur after you had anesthesia?
Do you smoke or use tobacco?
Do you have other symptoms such as finger pain? Arm or leg pain? A change in the texture of your skin? Loss of hair on your arms or hands?
Tests that may be done include:
Antinuclear antibody blood test
Blood differential
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Comprehensive metabolic panel
Duplex Doppler ultrasound
of the arteries to the extremities
Serum cryoglobulins
Serum protein electrophoresis
Urinalysis
X-ray of your hands
and feet
Treatment depends on the underlying cause.
Alternative Names
Blanching of the fingers; Fingers - pale; Toes that change color; Toes - pale
Images
Raynaud's phenomenon
Cryoglobulinemia of the fingers
References
Bartholomew JR. Other peripheral arterial diseases. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 66.
Melville AR, Belch JJF. Raynaud phenomenon. In: Hochberg MC, Gravallese EM, Smolen JS, van der Heijde D, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.
Rheumatology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 154.
Review Date 4/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Finger Injuries and Disorders