Stereotypic movement disorder: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Stereotypic movement disorder
Stereotypic movement disorder
Stereotypic movement disorder is a condition in which a person makes repetitive, purposeless movements. These can be hand waving, body rocking, or head banging. The movements interfere with normal activity or may cause bodily harm.
Causes
Stereotypic movement disorder is more common among boys than girls. The movements often increase with stress, frustration, and boredom.
The cause of this disorder, when it doesn't occur with other conditions, is unknown.
Stimulant drugs such as cocaine and amphetamines can cause a severe, short period of movement behavior. This may include picking, hand wringing, head tics, or lip-biting. Long-term stimulant use may lead to longer periods of the behavior.
Head injuries may also cause stereotypic movements.
Symptoms
Symptoms of this disorder may include any of the following movements:
Biting self
Hand shaking or waving
Head banging
Hitting own body
Mouthing of objects
Nail biting
Rocking
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider can usually diagnose this condition with a physical exam. Tests should be done to rule out other causes including:
Autism spectrum disorder
Chorea disorders
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
Tourette syndrome
or other tic disorder
Treatment
Treatment should focus on the cause, specific symptoms, and the person's age.
The environment should be changed so that it is safer for people who may injure themselves.
Behavioral techniques and psychotherapy may be helpful.
Medicines may also help reduce symptoms related to this condition. Antidepressants have been used in some cases.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the cause. Stereotypic movements due to medicines usually go away on their own after a few hours. Long-term use of stimulants can lead to longer periods of stereotypic movement behavior. The movements usually go away once the drug is stopped.
Stereotypic movements due to head injury may be permanent.
The movement problems usually don't progress to other disorders (such as seizures).
Possible Complications
Severe stereotypic movements may interfere with normal social functioning.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if your child has repeated odd movements that last longer than a few hours.
Alternative Names
Motor stereotypies
References
Jankovic J, Hallett M, Okun MS, Comella C, Fahn S, Goldman J. Stereotypies. In: Jankovic J, Hallett M, Okun MS, Comella C, Fahn S, Goldman J, eds.
Principles and Practice of Movement Disorders
. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 16.
Kim JW, Walter HJ, DeMaso DR. Motor disorders and habits. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 37.
Singer HS, Mink JW, Gilbert DL, Jankovic J. Motor stereotypies. In: Singer HS, Mink JW, Gilbert DL, Jankovic J, eds.
Movement Disorders in Childhood
. 3rd ed. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press; 2022:chap 8.
Review Date 4/17/2024
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Child Mental Health