Stoddard solvent poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Stoddard solvent poisoning
Stoddard solvent poisoning
Stoddard solvent is a flammable, liquid chemical that smells like kerosene. Stoddard solvent poisoning occurs when someone swallows or touches this chemical.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Petroleum distillates
Where Found
These products contain Stoddard solvent:
Dry cleaning fluids
Paints
Paint thinner
Stoddard solvent (
mineral spirits
)
Toners used in copy machines
This list may not include all products containing Stoddard solvent.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of Stoddard solvent poisoning in different parts of the body.
EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT
Burns in mouth
Severe throat pain
Severe pain or burning in the eyes, ears, nose, and mouth area
Vision loss
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Abdominal pain
Bloody stools
Burns in the food pipe (esophagus)
Nausea and vomiting
HEART AND BLOOD
Rapid heartbeat
Collapse (
shock
)
Weakness
LUNGS AND AIRWAYS
Breathing difficulty
(severe)
Throat swelling (which may also cause breathing difficulty)
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Burning sensations
Difficulty concentrating
Drowsiness
Headaches
Lightheadedness
Seizures
Dizziness
Memory problems
Nervousness
Numbness
in arms and legs
Staggering
Unconsciousness
SKIN
Burns
Irritation
Holes in the skin or underlying tissues
Home Care
Get medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by poison control or a provider. Do not give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, seizures, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow.
If the person breathed in the poison, move them to fresh air right away.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Bronchoscopy
-- camera placed down the throat to look for burns in the airways and lung
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Skin washing with soap and water (if poison touches the skin)
Flushing of the eyes with water (if poison touches the eyes)
Surgery to remove burned skin
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach (
gastric lavage
)
Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (
ventilator
)
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well the person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
Swallowing such poisons can have severe effects on many parts of the body. Burns in the airway or gastrointestinal tract can lead to tissue necrosis, resulting in infection, shock, and death, even several months after the substance is first swallowed. Scars may form in these tissues leading to long-term difficulties with breathing, swallowing, and digestion.
If Stoddard solvent get into the lungs (aspiration), serious and possibly permanent lung damage can occur.
Alternative Names
Texsolve S poisoning; Varsol 1 poisoning
References
Aronson JK. Organic solvents. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:385-389.
Wang GS, Buchanan JA. Hydrocarbons. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 147.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.