Castor oil overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Castor oil overdose
Castor oil overdose
Castor oil is a yellowish liquid often used as a lubricant and in laxatives. This article discusses poisoning from swallowing a large amount (overdose) of castor oil.
This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. If you have an overdose, you should call your local emergency number (such as 911) or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Ricinus communis
(castor oil plant) contain the toxin ricin. Seeds or beans swallowed whole with the hard outer shell intact typically prevent absorption of significant toxin. Purified ricin derived from the castor bean is highly toxic and lethal in small doses.
Poisonous Ingredient
Large amounts of castor oil can be poisonous.
Where Found
Castor oil comes from the seeds of the castor oil plant. It can be found in these products:
Castor oil
Alphamul
Emulsoil
Fleet Flavored Castor Oil
Laxopol
Unisol
Other products may also contain castor oil.
Symptoms
Symptoms of a castor oil overdose include:
Abdominal cramps
Chest pain
Diarrhea
Dizziness
Hallucinations (rare)
Fainting
Nausea
Shortness of breath
Skin rash
Throat tightness
Home Care
Castor oil is not considered very toxic, but allergic reactions are possible. Call the poison control center for treatment information.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free
Poison Help hotline
(1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
ECG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (through a vein)
Medicine to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
Normally, castor oil should cause few problems. Recovery is very likely.
If nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are not controlled, serious dehydration and electrolyte (body chemical and mineral) imbalances may occur. These can cause heart rhythm disturbances.
Keep all chemicals, cleaners, and industrial products in their original containers and marked as poison, and out of the reach of children. This will reduce the risk for poisoning and overdose.
Alternative Names
Alphamul overdose; Emulsoil overdose; Laxopol overdose; Unisol overdose
References
Aronson JK. Polyoxyl castor oil. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier B.V.; 2016:866-867.
Lim CS, Aks SE. Plants, herbal medications, and mushrooms. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 153.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning