Dermal melanocytosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Dermal melanocytosis
Dermal melanocytosis
Dermal melanocytosis  is the name of a kind of
birthmark
that is flat and blue, or blue-gray in color. They appear at birth or in the first few weeks of life.  Dermal melanocytosis was formerly called Mongolian blue spots.
Causes
Dermal melanocytosis is  common among people of Asian, Native American, Hispanic, East Indian, and African descent.
The color of the birth mark is from a collection of melanocytes in the deeper layers of the skin. Melanocytes are cells that make the pigment (color) in the skin.
Symptoms
Dermal melanocytosis is  not cancerous and is not associated with disease. The markings may cover a large area of the back.
The markings are usually:
Blue or blue-gray spots on the back, buttocks, base of spine, shoulders, or other body areas
Flat with irregular shape and unclear edges
Normal in skin texture
2 to 8 centimeters wide or larger
Dermal melanocytosis is  sometimes mistaken for
bruises
. This can raise a question about possible child abuse. It is important to recognize that dermal melanocytosis  is a birthmark, not bruises.
Exams and Tests
No tests are needed. Your health care provider can diagnose this condition by looking at the skin.
If your provider suspects an underlying disorder, further tests will be done.
Treatment
No treatment is  needed when dermal melanocytosis  is a normal birthmark. If treatment is needed, lasers may be used.
Spots  may be  a sign of an underlying disorder. If so,  treatment for that problem will likely be recommended. Your provider can tell you more.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Spots that are normal birthmarks often fade in a few years. They are almost always gone by the teen years.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
All birthmarks should be examined by a provider during the routine newborn examination.
Alternative Names
Mongolian spots; Congenital dermal melanocytosis
Images
Mongolian blue spots
Neonate
References
Haley A, Cummings K. Dermatology. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook.
23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 8.
James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Melanocytic nevi and neoplasms. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology.
13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 30.
McClean ME, Martin KL. Cutaneous nevi. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.
21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 670.
Review Date 5/31/2023
Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Birthmarks
Common Infant and Newborn Problems