Troponin test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Troponin test
Troponin test
A troponin test measures the levels of troponin T or troponin I proteins in the blood. These proteins are released when the heart muscle has been damaged, such as occurs with a heart attack. The more damage there is to the heart, the greater the amount of troponin T and I there will be in the blood.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
No special steps are needed to prepare, most of the time.
How the Test will Feel
You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. You may also feel some throbbing at the site after the blood is drawn.
Why the Test is Performed
The most common reason to perform this test is to see if a heart attack has occurred. Your health care provider will order this test if you have chest pain or other signs of a heart attack. The test is usually repeated two more times over the next 6 to 24 hours.
Your provider may also order this test if you have
angina
that is getting worse, but no other signs of a heart attack. (Angina is chest pain thought to be from a part of your heart not getting enough blood flow.)
The troponin test may also be done to help detect and evaluate other causes of heart injury.
The test may be done along with other cardiac marker tests, such as
CPK isoenzymes
or
myoglobin
.
Normal Results
Cardiac troponin levels are normally so low they cannot be detected with most blood tests.
Having normal troponin levels 12 hours after chest pain has started means a heart attack is unlikely.
A normal value range may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements (for example, "high sensitivity troponin test") or test different samples. Also, some labs have different cutoff points for "normal" and "probable myocardial infarction." Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Even a slight increase in the troponin level will often mean there has been some damage to the heart. Very high levels of troponin are a sign that a heart attack has occurred.
Most patients who have had a heart attack have increased troponin levels within 6 hours. After 12 hours, almost everyone who has had a heart attack will have raised levels.
Troponin levels may remain high for 1 to 2 weeks after a heart attack.
Increased troponin levels may also be due to:
Abnormally fast heartbeat
High blood pressure in lung arteries (
pulmonary hypertension
)
Blockage of a lung artery by a blood clot, fat, or tumor cells (
pulmonary embolus
)
Congestive heart failure
Coronary artery spasm
Inflammation of the heart muscle usually due to a virus (
myocarditis
)
Prolonged exercise (for example, due to marathons or triathlons)
Trauma that injures the heart, such as a car accident
Weakening of the heart muscle (
cardiomyopathy
)
Long-term kidney disease
Increased troponin levels may also result from certain medical procedures such as:
Cardiac angioplasty/stenting
Heart defibrillation or
electrical cardioversion
(purposeful shocking of the heart by medical personnel to correct an abnormal heart rhythm)
Open heart surgery
Radiofrequency ablation of the heart
Alternative Names
TroponinI; TnI; TroponinT; TnT; Cardiac-specific troponin I; Cardiac-specific troponin T; cTnl; cTnT
Images
Blood test
References
Bohula EA, Morrow DA. ST-Elevation myocardial infarction: management. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 38.
Bonaca MP, Sabatine MS. Approach to the patient with chest pain. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 35.
Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for coronary artery revascularization: Executive Summary: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association joint committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
Circulation
. 2022;145(3):e18-e114. PMID: 34882435
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34882435/
.
Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, Chaitman BR, Bax JJ; Executive Group on behalf of the Joint European Society of Cardiology (ESC)/American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)/World Heart Federation (WHF) Task Force for the Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction. Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction (2018).
Circulation
. 2018;138(20):e618-e651 PMID: 30571511
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30571511/
.
Review Date 10/23/2023
Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Heart Attack