Pneumococcal meningitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pneumococcal meningitis
Pneumococcal meningitis
Meningitis
is an infection of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. This covering is called the meninges.
Bacteria are one type of germ that can cause meningitis. The pneumococcal bacteria are one kind of bacteria that causes meningitis.
Causes
Pneumococcal meningitis is caused by
Streptococcus pneumoniae
bacteria (also called pneumococcus, or
S pneumoniae
). This type of bacteria is the most common cause of bacterial meningitis in adults. It is the second most common cause of meningitis in children older than age 2.
Risk factors include:
Alcohol use
Diabetes
History of meningitis
Infection of a heart valve with
S pneumoniae
Injury or trauma to the head
Meningitis in which there is leakage of spinal fluid
Recent ear infection with
S pneumoniae
Recent
pneumonia
with
S pneumoniae
Recent
upper respiratory infection
Spleen removal or a spleen that does not function
Symptoms
Symptoms usually come on quickly, and may include:
Fever and chills
Mental status changes
Nausea and vomiting
Sensitivity to light (
photophobia
)
Severe headache
Stiff neck
Other symptoms that can occur with this disease:
Agitation
Bulging fontanelles
in infants
Decreased consciousness
Poor feeding or irritability in children
Rapid breathing
Unusual posture, with the head and neck arched backwards (
opisthotonos
)
Pneumococcal meningitis is an important cause of fever in infants.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Questions will focus on symptoms and possible exposure to someone who might have the same symptoms, such as a stiff neck and fever.
If your provider thinks meningitis is possible, a lumbar puncture (
spinal tap
) will likely be done. This is to obtain a sample of spinal fluid for testing.
Other tests that may be done include:
Blood culture
Chest x-ray
CT scan of the head
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Gram stain
or other special stains, and
culture of the spinal fluid
Treatment
Antibiotics will be started as soon as possible. Ceftriaxone is one of the most commonly used antibiotics.
If the antibiotic is not working and your provider suspects antibiotic resistance, vancomycin or rifampin may be used. Sometimes, corticosteroids are also used.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Meningitis is a dangerous infection and it can be deadly. The sooner it is treated, the better your chance for recovery. Young children and adults over age 50 have the highest risk for death.
Possible Complications
Long-term complications may include:
Brain damage
Buildup of fluid between the skull and brain (
subdural effusion
)
Buildup of fluid inside the skull that leads to brain swelling (
hydrocephalus
)
Hearing loss
Seizures
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call 911 or the local emergency number or go to an emergency room if you suspect meningitis in a young child who has the following symptoms:
Feeding problems
High-pitched cry
Irritability
Persistent unexplained fever
Meningitis can quickly become a life-threatening illness.
Prevention
Early treatment of pneumonia and ear infections caused by pneumococcus may decrease the risk of meningitis. There are also two effective vaccines available to prevent pneumococcus infection:
Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23)
Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine
The following people should be vaccinated, according to current recommendations:
Children
Adults age 65 and older
People at high risk for pneumococcus infection
Alternative Names
Pneumococcus - meningitis
Images
Pneumococci organism
Pneumococcal pneumonia
Meninges of the brain
CSF cell count
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Meningitis. About bacterial meningitis.
www.cdc.gov/meningitis/about/bacterial-meningitis.html
. Updated January 9, 2024. Accessed September 3, 2024.
Hasbun R, Van de Beek D, Brouwer MC, Tunkel AR. Acute meningitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 87.
Nath A. Meningitis: bacterial, viral, and other. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 381.
Ramirez KA, Peters TR. Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus). In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 228.
Review Date 8/29/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Meningitis
Pneumococcal Infections