Toothpaste overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Toothpaste overdose
Toothpaste overdose
Toothpaste is a product used to clean teeth. This article discusses the effects of swallowing a lot of toothpaste.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an overdose, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Poisonous ingredients include:
Sodium fluoride
Triclosan
Where Found
Ingredients are found in:
Various toothpastes
Symptoms
Swallowing a large amount of regular toothpaste may cause stomach pain and possible intestinal blockage.
These additional symptoms may occur when swallowing a large amount of toothpaste containing fluoride:
Convulsions
Diarrhea
Difficulty breathing
Drooling
Heart attack
Salty or soapy taste in the mouth
Slow heart rate
Shock
Tremors
Vomiting
Weakness
Home Care
DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional. Seek immediate medical help.
If the product was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless told otherwise by a health care provider. DO NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow.
Before Calling Emergency
Determine the following information:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
If you go to the emergency room, take the container for the toothpaste with you, if possible.
If you swallow toothpaste that does not contain fluoride, you may not need to go to the hospital.
Those who swallow a lot of fluoride toothpaste, especially if they are small children, may need to go to the hospital emergency department.
At the emergency room, the provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal to prevent the rest of the poison from getting absorbed into the stomach and digestive tract.
Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration. A breathing machine (ventilator) would then be needed.
Calcium (an antidote), to reverse the effect of the poison.
Chest x-ray
.
ECG
(electrocardiogram, or heart tracing).
Endoscopy: a camera down the throat to see burns to the esophagus and stomach.
Fluids through a vein (by IV).
Medicines to treat symptoms.
Tube through the mouth (rare) into the stomach to wash out the stomach (
gastric lavage
).
Outlook (Prognosis)
People who swallow a
very large amount of fluoride toothpaste
and survive 48 hours usually recover.
Most nonfluoride toothpastes are nontoxic (nonpoisonous). People are very likely to recover.
Images
Tooth anatomy
References
Crinion S. Toxicology. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook, The
. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 3.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 10/7/2024
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cosmetics