Pelvic ultrasound - abdominal: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pelvic ultrasound - abdominal
Pelvic ultrasound - abdominal
A pelvic (transabdominal) ultrasound is an imaging test. It is used to examine organs in the pelvis.
How the Test is Performed
Before the test, you may be asked to put on medical gown.
During the procedure, you will lie on your back on the table. Your health care provider will apply a clear gel on your abdomen.
Your provider will place a probe (transducer), over the gel, rubbing back and forth across your belly:
The probe sends out sound waves, which go through the gel and reflect off body structures. A computer receives these waves and uses them to create a picture.
Your provider can see the picture on a TV monitor.
Depending on the reason for the test, women also may have a
transvaginal ultrasound
during the same visit.
How to Prepare for the Test
A pelvic ultrasound may be done with a full bladder. Having a full bladder can help with looking at organs, such as the womb (uterus), within your pelvis. You may be asked to drink a few glasses of water to fill your bladder. You should wait until after the test to urinate.
How the Test will Feel
The test is painless and easy to tolerate. The conducting gel may feel a little cold and wet.
You can go home right after the procedure and can resume your daily activities.
Why the Test is Performed
A pelvic ultrasound is used during pregnancy to check the baby.
A pelvic ultrasound also may be done for:
Cysts,
fibroid tumors
, or other growths or masses in the pelvis found when your provider examines you
Bladder growths or other problems
Kidney stones
Pelvic inflammatory disease
, an infection of a woman's uterus, ovaries, or tubes
Abnormal vaginal bleeding
Menstrual problems
Problems becoming pregnant
(infertility)
Normal pregnancy
Ectopic pregnancy
, a pregnancy that occurs outside the uterus
Pelvic and abdominal pain
Pelvic ultrasound is also used during a
biopsy
to help guide the needle.
Normal Results
The pelvic structures or fetus are normal.
What Abnormal Results Mean
An abnormal result may be due to many conditions. Some problems that may be seen include:
Abscess in the ovaries, fallopian tubes, or pelvis
Birth defects of the womb or vagina
Cancers of the
bladder
,
cervix
,
uterus
,
ovaries
,
vagina
, and other pelvic structures
Growths in or around the uterus and ovaries (such as cysts or fibroids)
Twisting of the ovaries
Enlarged lymph nodes
Risks
There are no known harmful effects of pelvic ultrasound. Unlike x-rays, there is no radiation exposure with this test.
Alternative Names
Ultrasound pelvis; Pelvic ultrasonography; Pelvic sonography; Pelvic scan; Lower abdomen ultrasound; Gynecologic ultrasound; Transabdominal ultrasound
References
Dolan MS, Hill CC, Valea FA. Benign gynecologic lesions: vulva, vagina, cervix, uterus, oviduct, ovary, ultrasound imaging of pelvic structures. In: Gershenson DM, Lentz GM, Valea FA, Lobo RA, eds.
Comprehensive Gynecology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 18.
Nickels LC, Duran-Gehring P. Emergency ultrasound. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap e3.
Porter MMB, Goldstein SR. Pelvic imaging in reproductive endocrinology. In: Strauss JF, Barbieri R, Dokras A, Williams CJ, Williams Z, eds.
Yen & Jaffe's Reproductive Endocrinology
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 33.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: LaQuita Martinez, MD, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Emory Johns Creek Hospital, Alpharetta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bladder Diseases
Ovarian Cysts
Pelvic Floor Disorders
Pelvic Pain
Uterine Cancer
Uterine Diseases
Uterine Fibroids
Vaginal Bleeding
Vaginal Diseases