Histrionic personality disorder: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Histrionic personality disorder
Histrionic personality disorder
Histrionic personality disorder is a mental condition in which people act in a very emotional and dramatic way that draws attention to themselves.
Causes
The causes of histrionic personality disorder are unknown. Genes and early childhood events may be responsible. It is diagnosed more often in women than in men. Health care providers believe that more men may have the disorder than are diagnosed.
Histrionic personality disorder usually begins by late teens or early 20s.
Symptoms
People with this disorder are usually able to function at a high level and can be successful socially and at work.
Symptoms include:
Acting or looking overly seductive
Being easily influenced by other people
Being overly concerned with their looks
Being overly dramatic and emotional
Being overly sensitive to criticism or disapproval
Believing that relationships are more intimate than they actually are
Blaming failure or disappointment on others
Constantly seeking reassurance or approval
Having a low tolerance for frustration or delayed gratification
Needing to be the center of attention (
self-centeredness
)
Quickly changing emotions, which may seem shallow to others
Exams and Tests
Histrionic personality disorder is diagnosed based on a psychological evaluation. The provider will consider how long and how severe the person's symptoms have been.
The provider can diagnose histrionic personality disorder by considering the person's:
Behavior
Overall appearance
Psychological evaluation
Treatment
People with this condition often seek treatment when they have depression or anxiety from failed romantic relationships or other conflicts with people. Medicine may help the symptoms. Talk therapy is the best treatment for the condition itself.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Histrionic personality disorder can improve with talk therapy and sometimes medicines. Left untreated, it can cause problems in people's personal lives and prevent them from doing their best at work.
Possible Complications
Histrionic personality disorder may affect a person's social or romantic relationships. The person may be unable to cope with losses or failures. The person may change jobs often because of boredom and not being able to deal with frustration. They may crave new things and excitement, which may lead to risky situations. All of these factors may lead to a higher chance of
depression
or suicidal thoughts.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
See your provider or mental health professional if you or someone you know has symptoms of histrionic personality disorder.
Alternative Names
Personality disorder - histrionic; Attention seeking - histrionic personality disorder
References
American Psychiatric Association. Personality disorders.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association Publishing; 2022.
Blais MA, Rivas-Vazquez RA, Ruchensky JR, Stein MB. Personality and personality disorders. In: Stern TA, Wilens TE, Fava M, eds.
Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry
. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 37.
Review Date 10/20/2024
Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Personality Disorders