Hartnup disorder: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hartnup disorder
Hartnup disorder
Hartnup disorder is  a genetic condition in which there is a defect in the transport of certain
amino acids
(such as
tryptophan
and histidine) by the small intestine and kidneys.
Causes
Hartnup disorder is a metabolic condition involving amino acids. It is an inherited condition. This condition occurs due to non-working copies of the
SLC6A19
gene. A child must inherit a copy of the variant gene from both parents to be seriously affected.
The condition most often appears between ages 3 to 9 years.
Symptoms
Most people show no symptoms. If symptoms do occur, they most often appear in childhood and may include:
Diarrhea
Mood changes
Nervous system (neurologic) problems, such as abnormal muscle tone and uncoordinated movements
Red, scaly
skin rash
, usually when skin is exposed to sunlight
Sensitivity to light (photosensitivity)
Short stature
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will order a urine test to check for high levels of neutral amino acids. The levels of other amino acids may be normal.
Your provider can test for the gene that causes this condition. Biochemical tests may also be ordered.
Treatment
Treatments include:
Avoiding sun exposure by wearing protective clothing and using a sunscreen with a protection factor of  15 or higher
Eating a high-protein diet
Taking supplements containing nicotinamide
Undergoing mental health treatment, such as taking antidepressants or mood stabilizers, if mood swings or other mental health problems occur
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most people with this disorder can expect to live a normal life with no disability. Rarely, there have been reports of severe nervous system disease and even deaths in families with this disorder.
Possible Complications
In most cases, there are no complications. Complications when they occur may include:
Changes in skin color that are permanent
Mental health problems
Rash
Uncoordinated movements
Nervous system symptoms can most often be reversed. However, in rare cases they can be severe or life threatening.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of this condition, especially if you have a family history of Hartnup disorder. Genetic counseling is recommended if you have a personal or family history of this condition and are planning a pregnancy.
Prevention
Genetic counseling prior to marriage and conception may help prevent some cases. Eating a high-protein diet may prevent amino acid deficiencies that cause symptoms.
References
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al. Defects in metabolism of amino acids. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 105.
Pearl PL, DiBacco ML, Gibson KM. Inborn errors of metabolism and the nervous system. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 91.
Review Date 8/18/2024
Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Associate Professor in Medical Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders