Lung metastases: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Lung metastases
Lung metastases
Lung metastases are cancerous tumors that start somewhere else in the body and spread to the lungs.
Causes
Metastatic tumors in the lungs are cancers that developed at other places in the body (or other parts of the lungs). They then spread through the bloodstream or lymphatic system to the lungs. It is different than lung cancer that starts in the lungs.
Nearly any cancer can spread to the lungs. Common cancers include:
Bladder cancer
Breast cancer
Lung cancer
Colorectal cancer
Kidney cancer
Melanoma
Ovarian cancer
Sarcoma
Thyroid cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Testicular cancer
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Bloody sputum
Chest pain
Cough
Shortness of breath
Weakness
Weight loss
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms. Tests that may be done include:
Bronchoscopy
to view the airways and take tissue samples, if possible
Chest CT scan
Chest x-ray
Cytologic studies of pleural fluid
or sputum
Lung needle biopsy
PET scan
Surgery to take a sample of tissue from the lungs (
surgical lung biopsy
)
Treatment
Chemotherapy is often used to treat metastatic cancer to the lung. Surgery to remove the tumors may be done when any of the following occurs:
The cancer has spread to only limited areas of the lung
The lung tumors can be completely removed with surgery
However, the main tumor must be curable, and the person must be strong enough to go through the surgery and recovery.
Other treatments include:
Radiation therapy
Immunotherapy
Targeted systemic therapy
The placement of
stents
inside the airways
Laser therapy
Using local heat probes to destroy the cancer
Using very cold temperature to destroy the cancer
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a
support group
where members share common experiences and problems.
Outlook (Prognosis)
A cure is unlikely in most cases of cancers that have spread to the lungs. But the outlook depends on the main cancer. In some cases, a person can live more than 5 years with metastatic cancer to the lungs.
Possible Complications
Complications of metastatic tumors in the lungs may include:
Fluid between the lung and chest wall (
pleural effusion
), which can cause shortness of breath or pain when taking a deep breath
Further spread of the cancer
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have a history of cancer and you develop:
Coughing up blood
Persistent cough
Shortness of breath
Unexplained weight loss
Prevention
Not all cancers can be prevented. However, many can be prevented by:
Eating healthy foods
Exercising regularly
Limiting alcohol consumption
Not smoking
Alternative Names
Metastases to the lung; Metastatic cancer to the lung; Lung cancer - metastases; Lung mets
Images
Bronchoscopy
Lung cancer - lateral chest x-ray
Lung cancer - frontal chest x-ray
Pulmonary nodule - front view chest x-ray
Pulmonary nodule, solitary - CT scan
Lung with squamous cell cancer - CT scan
Respiratory system
References
Arenberg DA, Reddy RM. Metastatic malignant tumors. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 79.
Hayman J, Naidoo J, Ettinger DS. Lung metastases. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 57.
Wald O, Izhar U, Sugarbaker DJ. Lung, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery
. 21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 58.
Review Date 6/17/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Lung Cancer