Shampoo - swallowing: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Shampoo - swallowing
Shampoo - swallowing
Shampoo is a liquid used to clean the scalp and hair. This article describes the effects of swallowing a liquid shampoo.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Where Found
The ingredients are found in various liquid shampoos.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Vomiting
Diarrhea
If you have an allergy to a dye in the shampoo, you may develop tongue and throat swelling, wheezing, and trouble breathing.
Home Care
Shampoo is considered relatively nontoxic (nonpoisonous). If an allergic reaction occurs, seek immediate medical help. Call 911 or the local emergency number.
Call
poison control
for further information.
Before Calling Emergency
Determine the following information:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
If you go to the emergency room, take the container for the poison with you, if possible.
If a visit takes place, the health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive:
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
A person who has an allergic reaction may need:
Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration. A breathing machine (ventilator) would then be needed.
Chest x-ray
.
ECG
(electrocardiogram, or heart tracing).
Outlook (Prognosis)
Shampoo is most often not poisonous. Most people make a full recovery.
Alternative Names
Swallowing shampoo
References
Crinion S. Toxicology. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook, The
. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 3.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 10/7/2024
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cosmetics