Lip moisturizer poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Lip moisturizer poisoning
Lip moisturizer poisoning
This poisoning results from eating or swallowing lip moisturizers containing para-aminobenzoic acid.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Para-aminobenzoic acid
is a naturally occurring substance that can absorb ultraviolet (UV) light. It is often used in sunscreen products, including lip moisturizers containing sunblocks. It is harmful in large amounts. It can also cause an allergic reaction in some people.
Where Found
Para-aminobenzoic acid is found in certain lip balm and moisturizers containing a sunblock. Chapstick is one brand name.
Symptoms
Symptoms include:
Diarrhea
Eye irritation
(if the product touched the eye)
Intestinal blockage
Nausea and
vomiting
Shortness of breath (with extremely high doses)
If you have an allergy to a dye in the moisturizer, you may develop tongue and throat swelling, wheezing, and trouble breathing.
Home Care
DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional.
If you have an allergic reaction, call 911 or the local emergency number.
Before Calling Emergency
Determine the following information:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
If you go to the emergency room, take the container for the poison with you, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal to prevent the poison from absorbing into the digestive tract
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
For an allergic reaction, the person may need:
Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration. A breathing machine (ventilator) would then be needed.
Chest x-ray
.
ECG
(electrocardiogram, or heart tracing).
Medicines specifically for allergic reactions.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Recovery is very likely. The ingredients are generally considered to be nontoxic.
Alternative Names
Chapstick poisoning
References
Crinion S. Toxicology. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook, The
. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 3.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 10/7/2024
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cosmetics