Face pain: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Face pain
Face pain
Face pain may be dull and throbbing or an intense, stabbing discomfort in the face or forehead. It can occur in one or both sides.
Causes
Pain that starts in the face may be caused by a nerve problem, injury, or infection. Face pain may also begin in other places in the body.
Abscessed tooth
(ongoing throbbing pain on one side of the lower face that gets worse with eating or touching)
Cluster headache
Herpes zoster
(shingles) or herpes simplex (cold sores) infection
Injury to the face
Migraine
Myofascial pain syndrome
Sinusitis
or sinus infection (dull pain and tenderness around the eyes and cheekbones that gets worse when you bend forward)
Tic douloureux
(trigeminal neuralgia)
Temporomandibular joint dysfunction syndrome
Sometimes the reason for the face pain is unknown.
Home Care
Your treatment will be based on the cause of your pain.
Painkillers may provide temporary relief. If the pain is severe or does not go away, contact your health care provider or dentist.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
Face pain is accompanied by chest, shoulder, neck, or arm pain. This could mean a
heart attack
. Call 911 or your local emergency number.
Pain is throbbing, worse on one side of the face, and aggravated by eating. Contact a dentist.
Pain is persistent, unexplained, or accompanied by other unexplained symptoms. Contact your primary provider.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
If you have an emergency condition (such as a possible heart attack), you will first be stabilized. Then, the provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history and do a physical exam. You will be referred to a dentist for tooth problems.
You may have the following tests:
Dental x-rays
(if a tooth problem is suspected)
ECG
(if heart problems are suspected)
Tonometry
(if
glaucoma
is suspected)
X-rays of the sinuses
Neurological tests will be performed if nerve damage could be a problem.
Images
Tooth abscess
Pain of cluster headache
References
Garza I, Robertson CE, Smith JH, Whealy MA. Headache and other craniofacial pain. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 102.
Digre KB. Headaches and other head pain.  In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 367.
Review Date 7/8/2023
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Facial Injuries and Disorders