Keratosis pilaris: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Keratosis pilaris
Keratosis pilaris
Keratosis pilaris is a common skin condition in which a protein in the skin called keratin forms hard plugs within hair follicles.
Causes
Keratosis pilaris is harmless (
benign
). It seems to run in families. It is more common in people who have very dry skin, or who have
atopic dermatitis
(eczema).
The condition is generally worse in winter and often clears in the summer.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Small bumps that look like "goose bumps" on the back of the upper arms and thighs
Bumps feel like very rough sandpaper
Skin-colored bumps are the size of a grain of sand
Slight pinkness may be seen around some bumps
Bumps may appear on the face and be mistaken for acne
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider can usually diagnose this condition by looking at your skin. Tests are often not needed.
Treatment
Treatment may include:
Moisturizing lotions to soothe the skin and help it look better
Skin creams that contain urea, lactic acid, glycolic acid, salicylic acid, tretinoin, or vitamin D
Steroid creams to reduce redness
Improvement often takes months, and the bumps are likely to come back if you stop using the medicine.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Keratosis pilaris may fade slowly with age.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if the bumps are bothersome and do not get better with lotions you buy without a prescription.
Images
Keratosis pilaris on the cheek
Keratosis pilaris rubra faceii
Keratosis pilaris rubra faceii
References
Bell MA, Grossberg AL. Keratosis pilaris and variants. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Coulson IH, Murell DF, eds.
Treatment of Skin Disease
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 125.
Patterson JW. Diseases of cutaneous appendages. In: Patterson JW, ed.
Weedon's Skin Pathology
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 16.
Review Date 10/11/2023
Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Eczema
Skin Conditions