Certified nurse-midwife: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Certified nurse-midwife
Certified nurse-midwife
Certified nurse-midwives (CNMs) are
health care providers
who provide health care services for women, newborns, and families. CNMs have graduated from a midwifery education program accredited by the Accreditation Commission on Midwifery Education (ACME). Upon entering the program, applicants either already have a registered nurse (RN) license or they receive their RN license as part of their CNM training.
To receive certification, CNMs must pass a national certification exam administered by the American Midwifery Certification Board (AMCB).
Certified midwives (CMs) receive the same training and certification as CNMs; however, they do not have an RN license. To maintain certification, both CMs and CNMs must pass recertification every 5 years.
CNMs can be licensed to practice in 50 states plus the District of Columbia and U.S. territories. CMs can be licensed in Arkansas, Colorado, Delaware, Hawaii, Maine, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, Virginia, Washington, and the District of Columbia.
This article focuses specifically on the role of CNMs.
SCOPE OF PRACTICE
CNMs are educated and trained to provide a broad range of health care services for women, newborns, and families. CNM functions include:
Pregnancy, labor and delivery, and postpartum care
Family planning and prescribing birth control
Gynecological care
Primary care for all stages of life, inclusive of all gender identities and sexual orientations
Wellness checkups, health screenings, and vaccinations
Prescribing medicines
Ordering diagnostic tests
Assisting physicians during surgery
PRACTICE SETTINGS
CNMs work in a variety of settings. These may include:
Private offices
Birth centers
Homes
Hospitals
Health departments
Community centers and public health systems
Remote care delivery such as telehealth
REGULATION OF THE PROFESSION
CNMs are regulated at two different levels. Licensing occurs at the state level and falls under specific state laws. As with other advanced practice nurses, license requirements for CNMs vary from state to state. They follow the legal requirements of the state where they practice.
Certification is done through a national organization and all states have the same requirements for professional practice standards. Only graduates of nurse-midwifery programs accredited by the ACNM are eligible to take the certification exam given by the AMCB.
Alternative Names
Nurse midwife; CNM
References
American College of Nurse-Midwives. About midwives.
www.midwife.org/About-Midwives
. Accessed November 25, 2024.
American College of Nurse-Midwives. Comparison of certified nurse midwives, certified midwives, and certified professional midwives.
www.midwife.org/acnm/files/cclibraryfiles/filename/000000008495/20220418_CNM-CM-CPM%20Comparison%20Chart_FINAL.pdf
. Updated April 2022. Accessed November 25, 2024.
American College of Nurse-Midwives. Essential facts about midwives: Midwives and birth in the United States.
www.midwife.org/acnm/files/cclibraryfiles/filename/000000008971/2023_EssentialFactsAboutMidwives.pdf
. Accessed November 25, 2024
American College of Nurse-Midwives. Position statement: Certified nurse-midwife and certified midwife education and certification in the United States.
www.midwife.org/acnm/files/acnmlibrarydata/uploadfilename/000000000077/2022_cnm-cm-educ-cert-US.pdf
. Updated 2022. Accessed November 25, 2024.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Midwifery education and certification: Statement of policy.
www.acog.org/clinical-information/policy-and-position-statements/statements-of-policy/2020/midwifery-education-and-certification
. Updated July 2023. Accessed November 25, 2024.
Review Date 12/8/2024
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.