Chest x-ray: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Chest x-ray
Chest x-ray
A chest x-ray is an
x-ray
of the chest, lungs, heart, large arteries, ribs, and diaphragm.
How the Test is Performed
You stand in front of the x-ray machine. You will be told to take a breath in and hold it when the x-ray is taken.
Two images are usually taken. You will first need to stand facing the machine, and then sideways.
How to Prepare for the Test
Tell your health care provider if you are pregnant. Chest x-rays are generally avoided during pregnancy, and special precautions are taken if they are needed.
How the Test will Feel
There is no discomfort. The imaging plate may feel cold.
Why the Test is Performed
Your provider may order a chest x-ray if you have any of the following symptoms:
A persistent cough
Chest pain
from a chest injury (with a possible rib fracture or lung complication) or from heart problems
Coughing up blood
Difficulty breathing
Fever
It may also be done if you have signs of
tuberculosis
,
lung cancer
, or other chest or
lung diseases
.
A serial chest x-ray is one that is repeated. It may be done to monitor changes found on a past chest x-ray.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may be due to many things, including:
In the lungs:
Collapsed lung
Collection of fluid around the lung
Lung tumor (noncancerous or cancerous)
Malformation of the blood vessels
Pneumonia
Scarring of lung tissue
Tuberculosis
Atelectasis
In the heart:
Problems with the size, position or shape of the heart
Problems with the position, size and shape of the large arteries
Evidence of heart failure
In the bones:
Fractures
or other problems of the ribs and spine
Osteoporosis
In the mediastinum (middle part of the chest):
Enlargement, which might be related to infection or tumor
Risks
There is low radiation exposure. X-rays are monitored and regulated to provide the minimum amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the benefits outweigh the risks. Pregnant women and children are more sensitive to the risks of x-rays.
Alternative Names
Chest radiography; Serial chest x-ray; X-ray - chest
Images
Aortic rupture - chest x-ray
Lung cancer - frontal chest x-ray
Adenocarcinoma - chest x-ray
Coal worker's lungs - chest x-ray
Coccidioidomycosis - chest x-ray
Coal workers pneumoconiosis - stage II
Coal workers pneumoconiosis - stage II
Coal workers pneumoconiosis, complicated
Coal workers pneumoconiosis, complicated
Tuberculosis, advanced - chest x-rays
Pulmonary nodule - front view chest x-ray
Sarcoid, stage II - chest x-ray
Sarcoid, stage IV - chest x-ray
Pulmonary mass - side view chest x-ray
Bronchial cancer - chest x-ray
Lung nodule, right middle lobe - chest x-ray
Lung mass, right upper lung - chest x-ray
Lung nodule - front view chest x-ray
References
Felker GM, Teerlink JR. Diagnosis and management of acute heart failure. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 49.
Jokerst CE, Gotway MB. Thoracic radiology: noninvasive diagnostic imaging. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 20.
Nair A, Barnett JL, Semple TR. Current status of thoracic imaging. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.
Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 1.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Acute Bronchitis
Bronchial Disorders
Chest Injuries and Disorders
Chronic Bronchitis
Congenital Heart Defects
Cough
Emphysema
Heart Failure
Heart Valve Diseases
Interstitial Lung Diseases
Lung Cancer
Lung Diseases
Pleural Disorders
Pneumococcal Infections
Pneumonia
Pulmonary Embolism
Pulmonary Fibrosis
Sarcoidosis
Tuberculosis
Valley Fever
X-Rays