Perirenal abscess: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Perirenal abscess
Perirenal abscess
Perirenal
abscess
is a pocket of pus around one or both kidneys. It is caused by an infection.
Causes
Most perirenal abscesses are caused by a
urinary tract infection
that starts in the bladder. It then spreads to the kidney, and to the area around the kidney. Surgery in the urinary tract or reproductive system or a bloodstream infection can also lead to a perirenal abscess.
The biggest risk factor for perirenal abscess is
kidney stones
, which may block urine flow. This provides a place for an infection to grow. Bacteria tend to stick to the stones and antibiotics cannot kill the bacteria there.
Stones are found in 20% to 60% of people with perirenal abscess. Other risk factors for perirenal abscess include:
Diabetes
Having an abnormal urinary tract
Trauma to the kidney
Intravenous
(IV) drug use
Symptoms
Symptoms of perirenal abscess include:
Chills
Fever
Pain in the flank (side of the abdomen) or
abdomen
, which may extend to the groin or down the leg
Sweating
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will examine you. You may have tenderness in the back or abdomen.
Tests include:
Blood culture
CT scan
of the abdomen
Ultrasound of the abdomen
Urinalysis
Urine culture
Treatment
To treat perirenal abscess, the pus can be drained through a catheter that is placed through the skin or with surgery. Antibiotics should also be given, at first through a vein (IV), then can switch to pills when the infection starts improving.
Outlook (Prognosis)
In general, quick diagnosis and treatment of a perirenal abscess should lead to a good outcome. Kidney stones must be treated to avoid further infections.
In rare cases, the infection can spread beyond the kidney area and into the bloodstream. This can be deadly.
Possible Complications
If you have kidney stones, the infection may not go away.
You may need to have the infection surgically removed.
You may have to have the kidney removed if infection cannot be cleared or is recurrent. This is rare.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have a history of kidney stones and develop:
Abdominal pain
Burning with urination
Chills
Fever
Urinary tract infection
Prevention
If you have kidney stones, ask your provider about the best way to treat them to avoid a perirenal abscess. If you undergo urologic surgery, keep the surgical area as clean as possible.
Alternative Names
Perinephric abscess
Images
Kidney anatomy
Kidney - blood and urine flow
References
Cooper KL, Badalato GM, Rutman MP. Infections of the urinary tract. In: Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 55.
Liu C, Shopsin B, Chambers HF. Staphylococcal infections. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 267.
Nicolle LE. Urinary tract infection in adults. In: Yu ASL, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Taal MW, eds.
Brenner and Rector's The Kidney
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 36.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Kelly L. Stratton, MD, FACS, Associate Professor, Department of Urology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Abscess
Kidney Diseases
Urinary Tract Infections