Primary amyloidosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Primary amyloidosis
Primary amyloidosis
Primary amyloidosis is a rare disorder in which abnormal proteins build up in tissues and organs. Clumps of the abnormal proteins are called amyloid deposits.
Causes
The cause of primary amyloidosis is not well understood. Genes may play a role.
The condition is related to abnormal and excess production of specific proteins. The proteins build up in certain organs. This makes it harder for the organs to work correctly.
Primary amyloidosis can lead to conditions that include:
Carpal tunnel syndrome
(due to protein deposits in the nerve)
Heart muscle damage (
cardiomyopathy
) leading to
congestive heart failure
Intestinal
malabsorption
Liver swelling and malfunction
Kidney failure
Nephrotic syndrome
(a group of signs that includes protein in the urine, low protein levels in the blood, high cholesterol levels, high triglyceride levels, and swelling throughout the body)
Nerve problems (neuropathy)
Orthostatic hypotension
(drop in blood pressure when you stand up)
Symptoms
Symptoms depend on the organs affected. This disease can affect many organs and tissues, including the tongue, intestines, skeletal and smooth muscles, nerves, skin, ligaments, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, and bladder.
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Abnormal heart rhythm
Fatigue
Numbness of hands or feet
Shortness of breath
Skin changes
Swallowing problems
Swelling in the arms and legs
Swollen tongue
Weak hand grip
Weight loss or weight gain
Other symptoms that may occur with this disease:
Decreased urine output
Diarrhea
Hoarseness or changing voice
Joint pain
Weakness
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine you. You will be asked about your medical history and symptoms. A physical exam may show that you have a
swollen liver
or
spleen
, or signs of heart or nerve damage.
The first step in diagnosing amyloidosis should be blood and urine tests to look for abnormal proteins.
Other tests depend on your symptoms and the organ that may be affected. Some tests include:
Abdominal ultrasound
to check the liver and spleen
Heart tests, such as an
ECG
,
echocardiogram
, or
MRI
Kidney function tests to check for signs of kidney damage (nephrotic syndrome or renal insufficiency)
Tests that can help confirm the diagnosis include:
Abdominal fat pad aspiration
Bone marrow biopsy
Heart muscle biopsy
Rectal mucosa biopsy
Treatment
Treatment may include:
Chemotherapy
Stem cell transplant
Organ transplant
If the condition is caused by another disease (secondary amyloidosis), that disease should be aggressively treated. This may improve symptoms or slow the disease from getting worse. Complications such as heart failure, kidney failure, and other problems can sometimes be treated, when needed.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well you do depends on which organs are affected. Heart and kidney involvement may lead to organ failure and death. Body-wide (
systemic
) amyloidosis can lead to death within 2 years.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of this disease. Also call if you have been diagnosed with this disease and have:
Decreased urination
Difficulty breathing
Swelling of the ankles or other body parts that does not go away
Prevention
There is no known prevention for primary amyloidosis.
Alternative Names
Amyloidosis - primary; Immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis; Primary systemic amyloidosis; Primary localized amyloidosis
Images
Amyloidosis of the fingers
Amyloidosis of the face
References
Buxbaum JN. The systemic amyloidoses. In: Hochberg MC, Gravallese EM, Smolen JS, van der Hejide D, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.
Rheumatology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 177.
Gertz MA, Dispenzieri A. Amyloidosis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 174.
Gertz MA, Buadi FK, Lacy MQ, Hayman SR. Immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis (primary amyloidosis). In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 93.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Frank D. Brodkey, MD, FCCM, Associate Professor, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Amyloidosis