Sachet poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Sachet poisoning
Sachet poisoning
A sachet is a bag of perfumed powder or a mix of dried flowers, herbs, spices, and aromatic wood shavings (potpourri). Some sachets also contain aromatic oils. Sachet poisoning occurs when someone swallows the ingredients of a sachet. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Potpourri is generally considered to be nontoxic.
Symptoms
Symptoms of sachet poisoning include:
Eye irritation
Diarrhea
Difficulty swallowing
Nausea
and vomiting
Rapid breathing
Shallow breathing
Stomach pain
Throat irritation
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the sachet with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator)
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Fluids through the vein (by IV)
Laxatives
Medicine to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on how much of the sachet contents they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery. Sachets are not considered very poisonous.
Alternative Names
Potpourri poisoning
References
Aronson JK. Benzethonium chloride and methylbenzethonium chloride. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:848.
Theobald JL, Kostic MA. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 77.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.