Urinary catheter - infants: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Urinary catheter - infants
Urinary catheter - infants
A urinary catheter is a small, soft tube placed in the bladder. This article addresses urinary catheters in babies. A catheter may be inserted and removed right away, or it may be left in place.
Information
WHY IS A URINARY CATHETER USED?
Babies may need urinary catheters while in the hospital if they are not making much urine. This is called low urine output. Babies can have low urine output because they:
Have low blood pressure
Have problems with their urinary system
Are given medicines that will not allow them to move their muscles
Are recovering from surgery or severe illness
When your baby has a catheter, health care providers can measure how much urine is coming out. They can figure out how much fluid your baby needs.
A baby may have a catheter inserted in a sterile fashion and then removed right away to help diagnose an infection in the bladders or kidneys.
HOW IS A URINARY CATHETER PLACED?
A provider puts the catheter into the urethra and up into the bladder. The urethra is an opening at the tip of the penis in boys and near the vagina in girls. The provider will:
Clean the tip of the penis or the area around the vagina.
Gently put the catheter into the bladder.
The catheter is usually taped into place.
The catheter is connected to a bag for the urine to go into.
This bag is emptied into a measuring cup to see how much urine your baby is making.
WHAT ARE THE RISKS OF A URINARY CATHETER?
There is a small risk for injury to the urethra or the bladder when the catheter is inserted. Urinary catheters that are left in place for more than a few days increase the risk for a bladder or kidney infection.
Alternative Names
Bladder catheter - infants; Foley catheter - infants; Urinary catheter - neonatal
References
James RE, Fowler GC. Bladder catheterization (and urethral dilation). In: Fowler GC, ed.
Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 96.
Krier B, Schultz K, Gomez-Urena E, Brooks A. Impact of Indwelling Urinary Catheter Necessity Review on Urinary Catheter Utilization and Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infections.
American Journal of Infection Control
. Volume 51, Issue 7, Supplement, 2023:S52.
Lissauer T, Carroll W. Kidney and urinary tract disorders. In: Lissauer T, Carroll W, eds.
Illustrated Textbook of Paediatrics
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 19.
Vogt BA. The kidney and urinary tract of the neonate. In: Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, eds.
Fanaroff and Martin's Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 97.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Mary J. Terrell, MD, IBCLC, Neonatologist, Cape Fear Valley Medical Center, Fayetteville, NC. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.