Renal vein thrombosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Renal vein thrombosis
Renal vein thrombosis
Renal vein thrombosis is a
blood clot
that develops in the vein that drains blood from the kidney.
Causes
Renal vein thrombosis is an uncommon disorder. It may be caused by:
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Hypercoagulable state: clotting disorders
Dehydration
(mostly in infants)
Estrogen use
Nephrotic syndrome
Pregnancy
Scar formation with pressure on the
renal
vein
Trauma (to the back or abdomen)
Tumor
In adults, the most common cause is nephrotic syndrome. In infants, the most common cause is dehydration.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Blood clot to the lung
Bloody urine
Decreased urine output
Flank pain
or low back pain
Exams and Tests
An exam may not reveal the specific problem. However, it may indicate nephrotic syndrome or other causes of renal vein thrombosis.
Tests include:
Abdominal CT scan
Abdominal MRI
Abdominal ultrasound
Duplex Doppler exam of the renal veins
Urinalysis
may show
protein in the urine
or
red blood cells in the urine
X-ray of the kidney veins (venography)
Treatment
The treatment helps to prevent the formation of new clots and reduces the risk of clot traveling to other locations in the body (embolization).
You may get medicines that prevent blood clotting (anticoagulants). You may be told to rest in bed or cut down on activity for a short time.
If sudden kidney failure develops, you may need
dialysis
for a short period.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Renal vein thrombosis most often gets better over time without lasting damage to the kidneys.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Acute renal failure (especially if thrombosis occurs in a dehydrated child)
End stage renal disease
Blood clot moves to the lungs (
pulmonary embolism
)
Formation of new blood clots
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have symptoms of renal vein thrombosis.
If you have experienced renal vein thrombosis, call your provider if you have:
Decrease in urine output
Blood in the urine
Breathing problems
(due to blood clot moving to your lung called pulmonary embolism)
Other new symptoms
Prevention
In most cases, there is no specific way to prevent renal vein thrombosis. Keeping enough fluids in the body may help reduce risk.
Aspirin is sometimes used to prevent renal vein thrombosis in people who have had a kidney transplant. Blood thinners such as warfarin may be recommended  for some people with chronic kidney disease.
Alternative Names
Blood clot in the renal vein; Occlusion - renal vein
Images
Kidney anatomy
Kidney - blood and urine flow
References
Augustine J, Wee AC, Krishnamurthi V, Goldfarb DA. Renal insufficiency and ischemic nephropathy. In: Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology.
12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 87.
DuBose TD, Santos RM. Vascular disorders of the kidney. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine.
26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 116.
Greco BA, Umanath K. Renovascular hypertension and ischemic nephropathy. In: Feehally J, Floege J, Tonelli M, Johnson RJ, eds.
Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology.
6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 41.
Review Date 4/12/2023
Updated by: Walead Latif, MD, Nephrologist and Clinical Associate Professor, Rutgers Medical School, Newark, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Blood Clots
Kidney Diseases