Malathion poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Malathion poisoning
Malathion poisoning
Malathion is an insecticide, a product used to kill or control bugs. Poisoning may occur if you swallow malathion, handle it without gloves, or do not wash your hands soon after touching it. Large amounts can be absorbed through the skin.
This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual poison exposure. If you have an exposure, you should call your local emergency number (such as 911) or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Malathion is the poisonous ingredient in these products.
Where Found
Malathion is used in agriculture to
kill and control insects
on crops and in gardens. Government agencies also use it to kill mosquitoes in large outdoor areas.
Malathion may also be found in certain products used to kill head lice.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of malathion poisoning in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Chest tightness
Difficulty breathing
Wheezing
Increased airway secretions or mucus
No breathing
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Increased urination
Inability to control urine flow (incontinence)
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Increased salivation
Increased tears in the eyes
Small pupils
In some cases, pupils may be dilated and do not react to light
HEART AND BLOOD
Low or high blood pressure
Slow heart rate
In some cases, heart rate may be rapid
Weakness
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Anxiety
Coma
Confusion
Convulsions
Dizziness
Headache
Muscle twitching
SKIN
Blue lips and fingernails
Sweating
STOMACH AND GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Abdominal cramps
Diarrhea
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Home Care
Call the poison control center for treatment information. If malathion is on the skin, wash the area thoroughly for at least 15 minutes.
Throw away all contaminated clothing. Follow instructions from the appropriate agencies for getting rid of hazardous waste. Wear protective gloves when touching contaminated clothing.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free
Poison Help hotline
(1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
People with malathion poisoning will likely be treated by first responders (firefighters, paramedics) who arrive when you call your local emergency number. These responders will decontaminate the person by removing the person's clothes and washing them down with water. The responders will wear protective gear. If the person is not decontaminated before getting to the hospital, emergency room personnel will decontaminate the person and provide other treatment.
The health care provider at the hospital will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Oxygen
Breathing support, including tube through the mouth and connected to a breathing machine (ventilator)
Chest x-ray
CT (computerized tomography) scan of the head
ECG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (fluids given through a vein)
Medicine to reverse the effects of the poison, which may include atropine or pralidoxime
Tube placed down the nose and into the stomach (sometimes)
Washing of the skin (irrigation) and eyes, perhaps every few hours for several days
Outlook (Prognosis)
People who continue to improve in the first 4 to 6 hours after receiving medical treatment usually recover. Prolonged treatment often is needed to reverse the poisoning. This may include staying in the hospital intensive care unit and getting long-term therapy. Some effects of the poison may last for weeks or months, or even longer.
Keep all chemicals, cleaners, and industrial products in their original containers and marked as poison, and out of the reach of children. This will reduce the risk of poisoning and overdose.
Alternative Names
Carbofos poisoning; Compound 4049 poisoning; Cythion poisoning; Fosfothion poisoning; Mercaptothion poisoning
References
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) website. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service. Toxicological Profile for Malathion.
wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/ToxProfiles/ToxProfiles.aspx?id=522&tid=92
. Reviewed March 20, 2014. Accessed April 13, 2023.
Mofenson HC, Caraccio TR, McGuigan M, Greensher J. Medical toxicology. In: Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds.
Conn's Current Therapy 2023
. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:1404-1457.
Welker KL, Thompson TM. Pesticides. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 152.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pesticides
Poisoning