Leptospirosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Leptospirosis
Leptospirosis
Leptospirosis is an infection caused by leptospira bacteria.
Causes
Leptospira bacteria can be found in fresh water that has been soiled by animal urine. You may get infected if you consume or come in contact with contaminated water or soil. The infection occurs in warmer climates. Leptospirosis is not spread from person to person, except in very rare cases.
Risk factors include:
Occupational exposure -- farmers, ranchers, slaughterhouse workers, trappers, veterinarians, loggers, sewer workers, rice field workers, and military personnel
Recreational activities -- fresh water swimming, canoeing, kayaking, and trail biking in warm areas
Household exposure -- pet dogs, domesticated livestock, rainwater catchment systems, and infected rodents
Weil disease, a severe form of leptospirosis, is rare in the continental United States. Hawaii has the highest number of cases in the United States.
Symptoms
Symptoms can take 2 to 30 days (average 10 days) to develop, and may include:
Dry cough
Fever
Headache
Muscle pain
Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea
Shaking chills
Less common symptoms include:
Abdominal pain
Abnormal lung sounds
Bone pain
Conjunctival (surface of the whites of the eyes) redness without fluid
Enlarged lymph glands
Enlarged spleen
or liver
Joint aches
Muscle rigidity
Muscle tenderness
Skin rash
Sore throat
Exams and Tests
The blood is tested for antibodies to the bacteria. During some phases of the illness, the bacteria themselves can be detected using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing.
Other tests that may be done:
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Creatine kinase
Liver enzymes
Urinalysis
Blood cultures
Treatment
Medicines to treat leptospirosis include:
Ampicillin
Azithromycin
Ceftriaxone
Doxycycline
Penicillin
Complicated or serious cases may need supportive care. You may need treatment in a hospital intensive care unit (ICU).
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook is generally good. However, a complicated case can be fatal if it is not treated promptly.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction when penicillin is given
Meningitis
Severe bleeding
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have any symptoms of, or risk factors for, leptospirosis.
Prevention
Avoid areas of stagnant water or floodwater, especially in tropical climates. If you are exposed to a high risk area, take precautions to avoid infection. Wear protective clothing, shoes, or boots when near water or soil contaminated with animal urine. You can take doxycycline to decrease the risk.
Alternative Names
Weil disease; Icterohemorrhagic fever; Swineherd's disease; Rice-field fever; Cane-cutter fever; Swamp fever; Mud fever; Hemorrhagic jaundice; Stuttgart disease; Canicola fever
Images
Antibodies
References
Haake DA. Leptospirosis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 298.
Haake DA, Levett PN. Leptospira species (leptospirosis). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 239.
Nemhauser J, Halsey E. CDC Yellow Book 2024: Health Information for International Travel. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/yellowbook-home
. Updated August 15, 2023. Accessed September 30, 2024.
Review Date 8/29/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bacterial Infections