Protein S blood test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Protein S blood test
Protein S blood test
Protein S is a normal substance in your body that prevents blood clotting. A blood test can be done to see how much of this protein you have in your blood.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
Certain medicines can change blood test results:
Tell your health care provider about all the medicines you take.
Your provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test. This may include blood thinners.
Do not stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
You may need this test if you have an unexplained blood clot or a family history of blood clots. Protein S helps regulate blood clotting. A lack of this protein or a problem with the function of this protein may cause blood clots to form in veins abnormally.
The test is also used to screen relatives of people who are known to have
protein S deficiency
.
Sometimes, this test is done to find the cause of repeated
miscarriages
.
Normal Results
Normal values are 60% to 150% inhibition.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Some labs use different measurements or may test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
A lack (deficiency) of protein S can lead to excess clotting. These clots tend to form in veins, not arteries.  Sometimes the clotting can be in unusual areas such as the abdominal veins or the brain.
A protein S deficiency may be inherited. It can also develop due to pregnancy or certain diseases, including:
Disorder in which the proteins that regulate blood clotting become overactive (
disseminated intravascular coagulation
)
HIV/AIDS infection
Liver disease
Long-term antibiotic use
Warfarin (Coumadin) use
Protein S level rises with age, but this does not cause any health problems.
Risks
There is little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another, and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
References
Anderson JA, Weitz JI. Hypercoagulable states. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 138.
Sarode R, Kessler CM. Coagulation and fibrinolysis. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 40.
Schafer AI. Approach to the patient with bleeding or thrombosis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 157.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Blood Clots