Fenoprofen calcium overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Fenoprofen calcium overdose
Fenoprofen calcium overdose
Fenoprofen calcium is a type of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). It is used to relieve pain, swelling, and inflammation. Fenoprofen calcium overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an
overdose
, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Fenoprofen  can be harmful in large amounts.
Where Found
Fenoprofen calcium is found in medicines with these names:
Fenoprofen
Nalfon
Naprofen
Other medicines may also contain fenoprofen calcium.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of a fenoprofen calcium overdose in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Wheezing
or
trouble breathing
, especially in those who have asthma or lung conditions
EYES AND EARS
Blurred vision
Ringing in the ears
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Little or no urine output
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Diarrhea
Nausea (common)
Possible bleeding in the stomach and intestines
Stomach pain
Vomiting (common, sometimes with blood)
HEART AND BLOOD
Chest pain
High or low blood pressure
Increased heart rate
Edema (swelling in the body or legs)
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Confusion
Coma
(decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness), in a very severe overdose
Seizures
, in a very severe overdose
Dizziness
(common)
Drowsiness
(common)
Blurred vision (common)
Delirium
(person is not making sense)
Movement problems
Numbness and tingling
Unsteadiness
Headache
SKIN
Rash
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Endoscopy
-- camera placed down the throat to check for burns in the esophagus and stomach
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Activated charcoal
Laxative
Tube through the mouth into the stomach if vomiting contains blood
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a breathing machine (
ventilator
)
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on how much fenoprofen calcium was swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster the medical help is received, the better the chance for recovery.
A mild overdose of this medicine does not usually cause serious problems. There may be some stomach pain and vomiting (possibly with blood).
However, a large amount of internal bleeding is possible, and a blood transfusion may be needed. Endoscopy may be needed to stop the internal bleeding.
In rare cases, there can be ringing in the ears and a bad headache. But these symptoms will likely pass as well.
If kidney damage is severe, dialysis (kidney machine) may be needed until kidney function returns. In some cases, the damage is permanent.
A large overdose can be very harmful to children and adults. Death may occur.
Alternative Names
Nalfon overdose
References
Aronson JK. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs.
16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:236-272.
Hatten BW. Aspirin and nonsteroidal agents. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 139.
Jeske AH. Fenoprofen. In: Jeske AH, ed.
Mosby's Dental Drug Reference.
13th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:502.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pain Relievers