Dacryoadenitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Dacryoadenitis
Dacryoadenitis
Dacryoadenitis is inflammation of the tear-producing gland (lacrimal gland).
Causes
Acute dacryoadenitis is most commonly due to viral or bacterial infection. Common causes include
mumps
,
Epstein-Barr virus
, staphylococcus, and gonococcus.
Chronic dacryoadenitis is most often due to noninfectious inflammatory disorders. Examples include
sarcoidosis
, thyroid eye disease, and
orbital pseudotumor
.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Swelling of the outer portion of the upper eyelid, with possible redness and tenderness
Pain in the area of swelling
Excess tearing or discharge
Swelling of lymph nodes
in front of the ear
Exams and Tests
Dacryoadenitis can be diagnosed by an exam of the eyes and lids. Special tests, such as a
CT scan
may be needed to look for the cause. Sometimes a biopsy will be needed to  make sure that a
tumor of the lacrimal gland
is not present.
Treatment
If the cause of dacryoadenitis is a viral condition such as mumps, rest and warm compresses may be enough. In other cases, the treatment depends on the disease that caused the condition.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most people will fully recover from dacryoadenitis. For more serious causes, such as sarcoidosis, the outlook depends on the disease that caused this condition.
Possible Complications
Swelling may be severe enough to put pressure on the eye and distort vision. Some people who were  first thought to have dacryoadenitis may turn out to have cancer of the lacrimal gland.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if swelling or pain increase despite treatment.
Prevention
Mumps can be prevented by getting vaccinated. You can avoid getting infected with gonococcus, the bacteria that cause gonorrhea,  by using  safe sex practices. Most other causes cannot be prevented.
Images
Lacrimal gland anatomy
References
Durand ML. Periocular infections. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 116.
McNab AA. Orbital infection and inflammation. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.
Ophthalmology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 12.14.
Review Date 8/5/2024
Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, Ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Eye Infections