Propane poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Propane poisoning
Propane poisoning
Propane is a colorless and odorless flammable gas that can turn into liquid under very cold temperatures.
This article discusses the harmful effects from breathing in or swallowing propane. Breathing in or swallowing propane can be harmful. Propane takes the place of oxygen in the lungs. This makes breathing difficult or impossible.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Breathing in or swallowing propane can be harmful. Propane takes the place of oxygen in the lungs. This makes breathing difficult or impossible.
Where Found
Propane can be found in:
Homes as fuel for heating water, cooking appliances, and drying clothes
Fuels used for forklifts and other equipment in construction and factories
Agriculture settings to dry grain crops
Symptoms
Symptoms depend on the type of contact, but may include:
Burning sensation
Convulsions
Cough
Diarrhea
Dizziness
Fever
General weakness
Headache
Irregular heartbeat
Rapid heartbeat
Lightheadedness
Loss of consciousness
(coma, or unresponsiveness)
Nausea and vomiting
Nervousness
Pain and numbness in arms and legs
Skin irritation
Slow and shallow breathing
Weakness
Touching liquid propane results in
frostbite
-like symptoms.
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move them to fresh air. If the person does not improve rapidly after moving to fresh air, call the local emergency number (such as 911).
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. DO NOT give water or milk if the person is having symptoms (such as vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow.
DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional.
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
Person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
If you go to the emergency room, take the container for the poison with you, if possible.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator)
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG), or heart tracing
Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the type of contact with the poison, and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better.
Those with short exposures may have temporary headaches or other mild nervous system symptoms. Stroke, coma, or death may occur with long-term exposure.
Alternative Names
Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG); Propane Autogas
References
Block JS, Philpot RM. Psychoactive compounds and substance use disorder. In: Wecker L, Ingram SL, eds.
Brody's Human Pharmacology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 24.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Wang GS, Buchanan JA. Hydrocarbons. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 147.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.