Grass and weed killer poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Grass and weed killer poisoning
Grass and weed killer poisoning
Many weed killers contain dangerous chemicals that are harmful if swallowed. This article discusses poisoning by swallowing weed killers containing a chemical called glyphosate.
This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual poison exposure. If you have an exposure, you should call your local emergency number (such as 911) or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Glyphosate is the poisonous ingredient in some weed killers.
Surfactants, such as polyoxyethyleneamine (POEA), are also found in many of the same weed killers, and can also be toxic.
Where Found
Glyphosate is in many weed killers, including those with these brand names:
Roundup
Bronco
Glifonox
Kleen-up
Rodeo
Weedoff
Other products may also contain glyphosate.
Symptoms
Symptoms of glyphosate poisoning include:
Abdominal cramps
Anxiety
Breathing difficulty
Coma
Blue lips or fingernails (rare)
Diarrhea
Dizziness
Drowsiness
Headache
Irritation in the mouth and throat
Low blood pressure
Nausea and vomiting (may vomit blood)
Weakness
Kidney failure
Slow heart rate
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free
Poison Help hotline
(1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
Exposure to glyphosate is not as harmful as exposure to other phosphates. But contact with a very large amount of it can cause severe symptoms. Care will begin by contaminating the person while starting other treatments.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests.
Breathing support, including oxygen. They may be placed on a breathing machine with a tube through the mouth into the throat, if needed.
Chest x-ray.
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing).
Intravenous fluids (through a vein).
Medicines to reverse the effects of the poison and treat symptoms.
Tube placed down the nose and into the stomach (sometimes).
Washing of the skin (irrigation). This may need to be continued for several days.
Outlook (Prognosis)
People who continue to improve over the first 4 to 6 hours after receiving medical treatment usually fully recover.
Keep all chemicals, cleaners, and industrial products in their original containers and marked as poison, and out of the reach of children. This will reduce the risk of poisoning and overdose.
Alternative Names
Weedoff poisoning; Roundup poisoning
References
Welker KL, Thompson TM. Pesticides. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 152.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pesticides