Malnutrition: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Malnutrition
Malnutrition
Malnutrition is the condition that occurs when your body does not get enough nutrients.
Causes
There are many types of malnutrition, and they have different causes. Some causes include:
Poor diet
Starvation due to food not being available
Eating disorders
Problems with digesting food or absorbing nutrients from food (malabsorption)
Certain medical conditions that make a person unable to eat
You may develop malnutrition if you lack a single vitamin in your diet. Lacking a vitamin or other nutrient is called a deficiency.
Sometimes malnutrition is very mild and causes no symptoms. Other times it can be so severe that the damage it does to the body is permanent, even though you survive.
Poverty, natural disasters, political problems, and war can all contribute to malnutrition and starvation, and not just in developing countries.
Some health conditions that are related to malnutrition are:
Malabsorption
Hunger
Beriberi
Binge eating
Deficiency -
Vitamin A
Deficiency -
Vitamin B1 (thiamine)
Deficiency -
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin)
Deficiency -
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine)
Deficiency -
Vitamin B9 (folacin)
Deficiency -
Vitamin E
Deficiency -
Vitamin K
Eating disorders (
bulimia
and
anorexia
)
Kwashiorkor
Megaloblastic anemia
Pellagra
Rickets
Scurvy
Spina bifida
Malnutrition is a significant problem all over the world, especially among children. It is very harmful to children because it affects brain development and other growth. Children who suffer from malnutrition may have lifelong problems.
Symptoms
Symptoms of malnutrition vary and depend on its cause. General symptoms include fatigue, dizziness, and weight loss.
Exams and Tests
Testing depends on the specific disorder. Most health care providers will do a nutritional assessment and blood work.
Treatment
Treatment most often consists of:
Replacing missing nutrients
Treating symptoms as needed
Treating any underlying medical condition
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the cause of the malnutrition. Most nutritional deficiencies can be corrected. However, if malnutrition is caused by a medical condition, that illness has to be treated in order to reverse the nutritional deficiency.
Possible Complications
If untreated, malnutrition can lead to mental or physical disability, illness, and possibly death.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Talk  to your provider about the risk of malnutrition. Treatment is necessary if you or your child have any changes in the body's ability to function. Contact your provider if these symptoms develop:
Fainting
Lack of menstruation
Lack of growth in children
Rapid hair loss
Prevention
Eating a well-balanced diet helps to prevent most forms of malnutrition.
Alternative Names
Nutrition - inadequate
Images
myPlate
References
Cederholm TE, Bosaeus IG. Malnutrition: assessment and support. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 198.
Mason JB, Booth SL. Vitamins, trace minerals, and other micronutrients. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 199.
Nagata JM, McDonald CM. Nutrition, food security, and health. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 62.
Saint-Cyr M, Waldrop SW, Krebs NF. Nutritional requirements. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 60.
Review Date 4/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Malnutrition