5'-nucleotidase : MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
5'-nucleotidase
5'-nucleotidase
5'-nucleotidase (5'-NT) is an enzyme (a type of protein) produced by the liver. A test can be done to measure the amount of this protein in your blood.
How the Test is Performed
Blood is drawn from a vein
. You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. Afterward, there may be some throbbing.
How to Prepare for the Test
Your health care provider may tell you to stop taking some medicines that could interfere with the test. Medicines that may affect results include:
Acetaminophen (Tylenol)
Halothane
Isoniazid
Methyldopa
Nitrofurantoin
Why the Test is Performed
Your provider may order this test if you have blood test results that may be due to a liver problem. It is used mostly to tell if the blood test results are due to liver damage or skeletal muscle damage.
Normal Results
The normal value is 2 to 15 IU/L.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Greater than normal levels may indicate:
Cirrhosis
(scarring of the liver and poor liver function)
Cholestasis
(flow of bile from the liver is blocked)
Heart failure
Hepatitis
(inflamed liver)
Liver cancer or tumor
Liver ischemia (reduced blood flow to the liver)
Liver necrosis (death of liver tissue)
Lung disease
Ovarian cancer
Pancreas disease
Rheumatoid arthritis
Use of medicines that are toxic to the liver
Risks
Slight risks from having blood drawn may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Bruising
Alternative Names
5'-NT
Images
Blood test
References
Pincus MR, Carty RP. Clinical enzymology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 21.
Pratt DS. Liver chemistry and function tests. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 73.
Review Date 1/30/2025
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Gastroenterologist, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bile Duct Diseases
Hepatitis
Liver Cancer
Liver Diseases