Breast cancer in men: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Breast cancer in men
Breast cancer in men
Breast cancer is
cancer
that starts in breast tissue. Both males and females have breast tissue. This means that anyone, including men and boys, can develop breast cancer.
Breast cancer in men is rare. Male breast cancer accounts for less than 1% of all breast cancers.
Causes
The cause of breast cancer in men is not clear. But there are risk factors that make breast cancer more likely in men:
Exposure to radiation
Higher estrogen levels due to factors such as heavy alcohol use,
cirrhosis
, and
obesity
Heredity, such as a family history of breast cancer, having a variant
BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene
, and certain genetic disorders, such as
Klinefelter syndrome
Excess breast tissue (
gynecomastia
)
Older age -- men are often diagnosed with breast cancer between ages 60 and 70
Symptoms
Symptoms of breast cancer in men include:
Lump or swelling in the breast tissue. One breast may be larger than the other.
A small lump beneath the nipple.
Unusual changes in the nipple or skin around the nipple such as redness, scaling, or puckering.
Nipple discharge.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will take your medical history and family medical history. You will have a physical exam and a breast exam.
Your provider may order other tests, including:
mammogram
.
Breast ultrasound
.
An
MRI of the breast
.
If any of the tests suggest cancer, your provider will arrange a
biopsy
to check for cancer.
If cancer is found, your provider will order other tests to find out:
How it has spread
What treatments might be best
What are the chances that the cancer might come back
The tests may include:
Bone scan
CT scan
PET scan
Sentinel lymph node biopsy
to check if the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes
The biopsy and other tests will be used to
grade and stage the tumor
. The results of those tests will help determine your treatment.
Treatment
Treatment options for breast cancer in men include:
Surgery to remove the breast, lymph nodes under the arm, the lining over chest muscles, and chest muscles, if needed
Radiation therapy
after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells and to target specific tumors
Chemotherapy
to kill cancer cells that have spread to other parts of the body or to lower the risk of the cancer returning after surgery
Hormone therapy to block hormones that may help certain types of breast cancer grow
During and after treatment, your provider may ask you to have more tests. This may include a repeat of tests you had to make the diagnosis.
Support Groups
Cancer affects how you feel about yourself and your life. You can ease the stress of illness by joining a
cancer support group
. Sharing with others who have had the same experiences and problems can help you feel less alone. The group can also point you to helpful resources for managing your condition.
Ask your provider to help you find a support group of men who have been diagnosed with breast cancer.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The long-term outlook for men with breast cancer is excellent when the cancer is found and treated early.
About 91% of men treated before the cancer has spread to other areas of the body are cancer-free after 5 years.
Almost 3 out of 4 men treated for cancer that has spread to lymph nodes but not to other areas of the body are cancer-free at 5 years.
Men who have cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body have a smaller chance of long-term survival.
Possible Complications
Complications include side effects from surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider right away if you notice something unusual about your breast, including any lumps, skin changes, or discharge.
Prevention
There is no clear way to prevent breast cancer in men. The best way to protect yourself is to:
Know that men can develop breast cancer
Know your risk factors and talk with your provider about screening and early detection with tests if needed
Know the possible signs of breast cancer
Tell your provider if you notice any changes in your breast
Alternative Names
Infiltrating ductal carcinoma - male; Ductal carcinoma in situ - male; Intraductal carcinoma - male; Inflammatory breast cancer - male; Paget disease of the nipple - male; Breast cancer - male
Images
Gynecomastia
References
Farr DE, Gradishar WJ. Male breast cancer. In: Klimberg VS, Gradishar WJ, Bland KI, Korourian S, White J, Copeland EM, eds.
Bland and Copeland's The Breast
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 67.
Kimberg VS, Hunt KL. Diseases of the breast. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery
. 21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 35.
National Cancer Institute website. Male breast cancer treatment (PDQ) - health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/breast/hp/male-breast-treatment-pdq
. Updated January 31, 2024. Accessed August 28, 2024.
Review Date 8/21/2024
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Male Breast Cancer