Fluoride overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Fluoride overdose
Fluoride overdose
Fluoride is a chemical commonly used to prevent tooth decay. Fluoride overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this substance.  This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an
overdose
, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Fluoride can be harmful in large amounts. Acute exposure to dangerous amounts of fluoride is rare, and usually occurs in small children.
Where Found
Fluoride is found in many over-the-counter and prescription products, including:
Certain mouthwashes and toothpastes
Certain vitamins (Tri-Vi-Flor, Poly-Vi-Flor, Vi-Daylin F)
Water that has fluoride added to it
Sodium fluoride liquid and tablets
Fluoride may also be found in other household items, including:
Etching cream  (also called acid cream, used to etch designs in drinking glasses)
Roach powders
Other products may also contain fluoride.
Symptoms
Symptoms of a fluoride overdose include:
Abdominal pain
Abnormal taste
in the mouth  (salty or soapy taste)
Diarrhea
Drooling
Eye irritation (if it gets in the eyes)
Headache
Abnormal levels of calcium and potassium in the blood
Irregular or slow heartbeat
Cardiac arrest
(in severe cases)
Nausea and vomiting
Shallow breathing
Tremors (rhythmic movements)
Weakness
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition (for example, is the person awake or alert?)
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Call for help even if you don't know this information.
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Calcium or milk
Laxatives
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a breathing machine (
ventilator
)
The above tests and treatments are more likely to be done if someone overdoses on fluoride from household products, such as hydrofluoric acid in rust remover. They are less likely to be done for an overdose of fluoride from toothpaste and other health products.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on how much fluoride was swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
The amount of fluoride in toothpaste is usually not swallowed in large enough amounts to cause harm.
References
Aronson JK. Fluoride salts and derivatives. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs.
16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:366-367.
Levine MD. Chemical injuries. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 55.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.