Perichondritis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Perichondritis
Perichondritis
Perichondritis is an infection of the skin and tissue surrounding the cartilage of the outer ear.
Causes
Cartilage is the thick tissue that creates the shape of the nose and the outer ear. All cartilage has a thin layer of tissue around it called the perichondrium. This covering helps provide nutrients to the cartilage.
The most common type of bacteria that causes perichondritis infection is
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
.
Perichondritis is usually caused by an injury to the ear due to:
Ear surgery
Ear piercing (especially piercing of the cartilage)
Contact sports
Trauma to the side of the head
Ear piercing through the cartilage is probably the major risk factor today. Surgery, burns, and acupuncture also increase the risk for infection.
Perichondritis can lead to chondritis, which is an infection of the cartilage itself. This can cause severe damage to the ear structure.
Symptoms
A painful, swollen, red ear is the most common symptom. At first, the infection will look like a skin infection, but it quickly worsens and involves the perichondrium.
The redness usually surrounds an area of injury, such as a cut or scrape. There may also be fever. In more severe cases, fluid will drain from the wound.
Exams and Tests
The diagnosis is based on the medical history and examination of the ear. If there is a history of trauma to the ear and the ear is red and very tender, then perichondritis is diagnosed. There may be a change in the normal shape of the ear. The ear may look swollen.
Treatment
Treatment consists of antibiotics, either by mouth or directly into the bloodstream through an
intravenous
(IV) line. Antibiotics can be given for 10 days to several weeks. If there is a trapped collection of pus, you may need surgery. The surgery is done to drain this fluid and remove any dead skin and cartilage.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on how quickly the infection is diagnosed and treated. If antibiotics are taken early, full recovery is expected. If the infection involves the ear cartilage, more involved treatment is needed.
Possible Complications
If the infection spreads to the ear cartilage, part of the ear tissue may die and need to be surgically removed. If this occurs, plastic surgery may be needed to restore the ear to its normal shape.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
If you have any trauma to your ear (a scratch, blow, or piercing) and then develop pain and redness over the stiff part of the outer ear, contact your health care provider. You may need to take antibiotics.
Prevention
Avoid piercing your ear through the cartilage. Piercing the ear lobe is a better option. The popularity of cartilage piercing has led to a significant increase in the number of perichondritis and chondritis infections.
References
Haddad J. External otitis (otitis externa). In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 679.
Naples JG, Brant JA, Ruckenstein MJ. Infections of the external ear. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 138.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cartilage Disorders
Ear Infections