Acidosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Acidosis
Acidosis
Acidosis is a condition in which there is too much acid in the body fluids. It is the opposite of
alkalosis
(a condition in which there is too much base in the body fluids).
Causes
The kidneys and lungs maintain the balance (proper pH level) of chemicals called acids and bases in the body. Acidosis occurs when acid builds up or when bicarbonate (a base) is lost. Acidosis is classified as either
respiratory
or
metabolic acidosis
.
Respiratory acidosis develops when there is too much carbon dioxide (an acid) in the body. This type of acidosis is usually caused when the body is unable to remove enough carbon dioxide through breathing. Other names for respiratory acidosis are hypercapnic acidosis and carbon dioxide acidosis. Causes of respiratory acidosis include:
Chest deformities, such as
kyphosis
Chest injuries
Chest muscle weakness
Long-term (chronic) lung disease
Neuromuscular disorders, such as myasthenia gravis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or muscular dystrophy
Overuse of sedative drugs, causing decreased respiration
Acute lung disease, such as severe pneumonia or acute respiratory distress syndrome associated with severe medical illness
Metabolic acidosis develops when too much acid is produced in the body. It can also occur when the kidneys cannot remove enough acid from the body. There are several types of metabolic acidosis:
Diabetic acidosis
(also called diabetic ketoacidosis and DKA) develops when substances called ketone bodies (which are acidic) build up during uncontrolled
diabetes
(usually type 1 diabetes).
Hyperchloremic acidosis is caused by the loss of too much sodium bicarbonate from the body, which can happen with severe diarrhea.
Kidney disease (uremia,
distal renal tubular acidosis
or
proximal renal tubular acidosis
).
Lactic acidosis.
Poisoning by aspirin, ethylene glycol (found in antifreeze), or methanol.
Severe
dehydration
.
Lactic acidosis
is a buildup of
lactic acid
. Lactic acid is mainly produced in muscle cells and red blood cells. It forms when the body breaks down carbohydrates to use for energy when oxygen levels are low. This can be caused by:
Cancer
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Drinking too much alcohol
Exercising vigorously for a very long time
Liver failure
Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)
Medicines, such as salicylates, metformin, anti-retrovirals
MELAS (a very rare genetic mitochondrial disorder that affects energy production)
Prolonged lack of oxygen from shock, heart failure, or severe anemia
Seizures
Sepsis
-- severe illness due to infection with bacteria or other germs
Severe asthma
Compensated acidosis occurs when the body returns the acid-base balance to near normal in cases of acidosis, but bicarbonate and carbon dioxide levels remain abnormal.
Symptoms
Metabolic acidosis
symptoms depend on the underlying disease or condition. Metabolic acidosis itself causes rapid and deep breathing as your body tries to compensate for it. Confusion or lethargy may also occur. Severe metabolic acidosis can lead to shock or death. In some situations, metabolic acidosis can be a mild, ongoing (chronic) condition.
Respiratory acidosis
symptoms can include:
Confusion
Fatigue
Lethargy
Shortness of breath
Sleepiness
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical examination and ask about your symptoms.
These tests can help diagnose acidosis. They can also determine whether the cause is a breathing problem or a metabolic problem. Tests may include:
Arterial or venous blood gas analysis
Basic metabolic panel
(group of blood tests that measure sodium and potassium levels, kidney function, and other chemicals and functions) to show whether the type of acidosis is metabolic or respiratory
Blood ketones
Lactic acid test
Urine ketones
Urine pH
Other blood tests may be needed to determine the cause of the acidosis.
Other tests that may be needed to determine the cause of the acidosis include:
Chest x-ray
CT abdomen
Urinalysis
Urine pH
Treatment
Treatment is aimed at the health problem causing the acidosis. In some cases, sodium bicarbonate (the chemical in baking soda) may be given to reduce the acidity of the blood. Often, you will receive lots of fluids through your vein.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Acidosis can be dangerous if untreated. Many cases respond well to treatment. The outlook will depend on the underlying disease causing the condition.
Possible Complications
Complications depend on the specific type of acidosis.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
All the types of acidosis will cause symptoms that require treatment by your provider.
Prevention
Prevention depends on the cause of the acidosis. Many causes of metabolic acidosis can be prevented, including diabetic ketoacidosis and some causes of lactic acidosis. Normally, people with healthy kidneys and lungs do not have serious acidosis.
Images
Kidneys
References
Oh MS, Briefel G, Pincus MR. Evaluation of renal function, water, electrolytes, and acid-base balance. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 15.
Sanghavi S, Albert TJ, Swenson ER. Acid-base balance. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 12.
Seifter JL. Acid-base disorders. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 104.
Review Date 11/19/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Metabolic Disorders