Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease
Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease
Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease (ADTKD) is a group of inherited conditions that affect the tubules of the kidneys, causing the kidneys to gradually lose their ability to work.
Causes
ADTKD is caused by mutations in certain genes. These gene problems are passed down through families (inherited) in an
autosomal dominant pattern
. This means the abnormal gene is needed from only one parent in order to inherit the disease. Often, many family members have the disease.
With all forms of ADTKD, as the disease progresses, the kidney tubules are damaged. These are the structures in the kidneys that allow most fluid in the blood to be filtered and returned to the blood.
The abnormal genes that cause the different forms of ADTKD are:
UMOD
gene -- causes ADTKD-
UMOD
, or uromodulin kidney disease
MUC1
gene -- causes ADTKD-
MUC1
, or mucin-1 kidney disease
REN
gene -- causes ADTKD-
REN
, or familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy type 2 (FJHN2)
HNF1B
gene -- causes ADTKD-
HNF1B
, or maturity-onset diabetes mellitus of the young type 5 (MODY5)
When the cause of ADTKD is not known or a genetic test has not been done, it is called ADTKD-NOS.
Symptoms
Early in the disease, depending on the form of ADTKD, symptoms may include:
Excessive urination (polyuria)
Gout
Salt cravings
Urination at night
(nocturia)
Weakness
As the disease worsens, symptoms of
kidney failure
may develop, which include:
Easy bruising or bleeding
Fatigue
, weakness
Frequent hiccups
Headache
Increased skin color (skin may appear yellow or brown)
Itching
Malaise
(general ill feeling)
Muscle twitching or cramps
Nausea
Pale skin
Reduced sensation in the hands, feet, or other areas
Vomiting blood or blood in the stool
Weight loss
Seizures
Confusion, decreased alertness, coma
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms. You'll likely be asked if other family members have ADTKD or kidney disease.
Tests that may be done include:
24-hour urine volume
and
electrolytes
Blood urea nitrogen
(BUN)
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Creatinine
blood test
Creatinine clearance
-- blood and urine
Uric acid blood test
Urine specific gravity
(will be low)
The following tests can help diagnose this condition:
Abdominal CT scan
Abdominal ultrasound
Kidney biopsy
Kidney ultrasound
Treatment
There is no cure for ADTKD. At first, treatment focuses on controlling symptoms, reducing complications, and slowing the progression of the disease. Because so much water and salt may be lost, you may need to follow instructions on drinking plenty of fluids and taking salt supplements to avoid dehydration.
As the disease progresses, kidney failure develops. Treatment may involve taking medicines and diet changes, limiting foods containing phosphorus and potassium. You may need dialysis and a kidney transplant.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The age at which people with ADTKD reach
end-stage kidney disease
varies, depending on the form of the disease. It can be as young as in the teens or in older adulthood. Lifelong treatment may control the symptoms of chronic kidney disease.
Possible Complications
Kidney damage due to ADTKD may lead to the following health problems:
Anemia
Bone weakening and fractures
Cardiac tamponade
Changes in glucose metabolism
Congestive heart failure
End-stage kidney disease
High blood pressure
Hyponatremia
(low blood sodium level)
Hyperkalemia
(too much potassium in the blood), especially with end-stage kidney disease
Hypokalemia
(too little potassium in the blood)
Infertility
Menstrual problems
Miscarriage
Pericarditis
Peripheral neuropathy
Platelet dysfunction with easy bruising
Skin color changes
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have any symptoms of urinary or kidney problems.
Prevention
Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease is an inherited disorder. It may not be preventable.
Alternative Names
ADTKD; Medullary cystic kidney disease; Renin associated kidney disease; Familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy; Uromodulin associated kidney disease
Images
Kidney anatomy
Kidney - blood and urine flow
References
Eckardt KU, Alper SL, Antignac C, et al. Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease: diagnosis, classification, and management--a KDIGO consensus report.
Kidney Int
. 2015;88(4):676-683. PMID: 25738250
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25738250/
.
Guay-Woodford LM. Other cystic kidney diseases. In: Johnson RJ, Floege J, Tonelli M, eds.
Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 47.
Torres VE, Harris PC. Cystic diseases of the kidney. In: Yu ASL, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Taal MW, eds.
Brenner and Rector's The Kidney
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 45.
Review Date 8/28/2023
Updated by: Walead Latif, MD, Nephrologist and Clinical Associate Professor, Rutgers Medical School, Newark, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Kidney Cysts