Endometrial polyps: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Endometrial polyps
Endometrial polyps
The endometrium is the lining of the inside of the womb (uterus). Overgrowth of this lining can create polyps. Polyps are fingerlike growths that are attached to the inner wall of the uterus. They can be as small as a sesame seed or larger than a golf ball. There may be just one or many polyps.
Causes
The exact cause of endometrial polyps is not known. They tend to grow when there is more of the hormone estrogen in the body.
Most endometrial polyps are not cancerous but they can be cancerous or precancerous. The chance of cancer is higher if you are postmenopausal, taking tamoxifen, or have heavy or irregular periods.
Other factors that may increase the risk for endometrial polyps are:
Obesity
Tamoxifen or similar medicines used as a treatment for breast cancer
Postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy
Family history of Lynch syndrome or Cowden syndrome (genetic conditions that run in families)
Endometrial polyps are common in women between 20 to 40 years of age.
Symptoms
You may not have any symptoms of endometrial polyps. If you do have symptoms, they may include:
Menstrual bleeding that is not regular or predictable
Long or heavy menstrual bleeding
Bleeding between periods
Bleeding from the vagina after menopause
Trouble getting or staying pregnant (
infertility
)
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider may perform these tests to find out if you have endometrial polyps:
Transvaginal ultrasound
Hysteroscopy
Endometrial biopsy
Hysterosonogram: a specialized type of ultrasound in which fluid is put into the uterine cavity while an ultrasound is performed
Three-dimensional ultrasound
Treatment
Many polyps should be removed because of the small risk for cancer.
Endometrial polyps are most often removed by a procedure called hysteroscopy. Sometimes, a
D and C
procedure (dilation and curettage) can be done to biopsy the endometrium and remove the polyp. This is less commonly used.
Postmenopausal women who have polyps that are not causing symptoms may also consider watchful waiting. However, the polyp should be removed if it is causing vaginal bleeding.
Outlook (Prognosis)
In rare cases, polyps can return after treatment.
Possible Complications
Endometrial polyps may make it hard to get or stay pregnant.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have:
Menstrual bleeding that is not regular or predictable
Long or heavy menstrual bleeding
Bleeding between periods
Bleeding from the vagina after menopause
Prevention
You cannot prevent endometrial polyps.
Alternative Names
Uterine polyps; Uterine bleeding - polyps; Vaginal bleeding - polyps
References
Bulun SE, Babayev E. Physiology and pathology of the female reproductive axis. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 15.
Dolan MS, Hill CC, Valea FA. Benign gynecologic lesions: vulva, vagina, cervix, uterus, oviduct, ovary, ultrasound imaging of pelvic structures. In: Gershenson DM, Lentz GM, Valea FA, Lobo RA, eds.
Comprehensive Gynecology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 18.
Gilks B. Uterus: corpus. In: Goldblum JR, Lamps LW, McKenney JK, Myers JL, eds.
Rosai and Ackerman's Surgical Pathology
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 33.
Review Date 10/15/2024
Updated by: John D. Jacobson, MD, Professor Emeritus, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Uterine Diseases