Methylmalonic acid blood test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Methylmalonic acid blood test
Methylmalonic acid blood test
The methylmalonic acid blood test measures the amount of methylmalonic acid in the blood.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample is needed
.
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is necessary.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterwards, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
Methylmalonic acid is a substance produced when proteins, called amino acids, in the body break down.
Your health care provider may order this test if there are signs of certain genetic disorders, such as
methylmalonic acidemia
. Testing for this disorder is often done as part of a
newborn screening exam
.
This test may also be done with other tests to check for a
vitamin B12 deficiency
.
Normal Results
Normal values are 0.07 to 0.27 micromoles per liter.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
A higher than normal value may be due to vitamin B12 deficiency or methylmalonic acidemia.
Risks
There is little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma (blood buildup under the skin)
Excessive bleeding
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Images
Blood test
References
Antony AC. Megaloblastic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 40.
Elghetany MT, Banki K. Erythrocytic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 33.
Review Date 11/19/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders
Lipid Metabolism Disorders
Newborn Screening