Jaundice causes: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Jaundice causes
Jaundice causes
Jaundice is a yellow color in the skin, mucous membranes, or eyes. The yellow color comes from bilirubin, a byproduct of your body processing old red blood cells. Jaundice is often a sign of a disease.
This article talks about the possible causes of jaundice in children and adults.
Newborn jaundice
occurs in very young infants.
Information
Jaundice is often a sign of a problem with the liver, gallbladder, or pancreas. Jaundice can occur when too much bilirubin builds up in the body. This may happen when:
There are too many red blood cells dying or breaking down (hemolysis) and going to the liver.
The liver is overloaded or damaged.
The bilirubin from the liver is not able to properly move into the digestive tract.
Conditions that can cause jaundice include:
Infections of the liver by a virus (
hepatitis A
,
hepatitis B
,
hepatitis C
,
hepatitis D
, and hepatitis E) or a parasite
Use of certain drugs (such as an overdose of acetaminophen) or reactions to other medicines or exposure to poisons (for example, poisonous mushrooms)
Birth defects or disorders present since birth that makes it hard for the body to breakdown bilirubin (such as
Gilbert syndrome
,
Dubin-Johnson syndrome
, Rotor syndrome, or
Crigler-Najjar syndrome
)
Chronic liver disease
such as advanced non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
Gallstones
or gallbladder disorders causing blockage of the bile duct
Blood disorders
Cancer of the pancreas
Bile buildup in the gallbladder because of pressure in the belly area during pregnancy (jaundice of pregnancy)
Cirrhosis of the liver
Alternative Names
Causes of jaundice; Cholestasis
Images
Jaundice
References
Lidofsky SD. Jaundice. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 21.
Pitt HA, Nakeeb A. Bile secretion and pathophysiology of biliary tract obstruction. In: Jarnagin WR, Allen PJ, Chapman WC, et al, eds.
Blumgart's Surgery of the Liver, Biliary Tract and Pancreas.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 8.
Wyatt JI, Haugk B. Liver, biliary system and pancreas. In: Cross SS, ed.
Underwood's Pathology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 16.
Review Date 8/7/2023
Updated by: Michael M. Phillips, MD, Emeritus Professor of Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Jaundice