Lymphangitis : MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Lymphangitis
Lymphangitis
Lymphangitis is an infection of the lymph vessels (channels). It is a complication of some bacterial infections.
Causes
The
lymph system
is a network of lymph nodes, lymph ducts, lymph vessels, and organs that produce and move a fluid called lymph from tissues to the bloodstream.
Lymphangitis most often results from an
acute
streptococcal infection of the skin. Less often, it is caused by a staphylococcal infection. The infection causes the lymph vessels to become inflamed.
Lymphangitis may be a sign that a skin or soft tissue infection is getting worse. The bacteria can spread further into the blood and cause life-threatening problems.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Fever and chills
Enlarged and tender lymph nodes (glands) -- usually in the elbow, armpit, or groin
General ill feeling (malaise)
Headache
Loss of appetite
Muscle aches
Red streaks from the infected area to the armpit or groin (may be faint or obvious)
Throbbing pain along the affected area
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam, which includes feeling your lymph nodes and examining your skin. The provider may look for signs of injury around swollen lymph nodes.
biopsy
and
culture
of the affected area may reveal the cause of the inflammation. A
blood culture
may be done to see if the infection has spread to the blood.
Treatment
Lymphangitis may spread within hours. Treatment should begin right away.
Treatment may include:
Antibiotics by mouth or IV (through a vein) to treat any infection
Pain medicine to control pain
Anti-inflammatory medicines to reduce inflammation and swelling
Cool compresses to reduce inflammation and pain
Surgery may be needed to drain an
abscess
.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Prompt treatment with antibiotics usually leads to a complete recovery. It may take weeks, or even months, for swelling to disappear. The amount of time it takes to recover depends on the cause.
Possible Complications
Health problems that may occur include:
Abscess (collection of pus)
Cellulitis
(a skin infection)
Sepsis
(a general or bloodstream infection)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of lymphangitis.
Alternative Names
Inflamed lymph vessels; Inflammation - lymph vessels; Infected lymph vessels; Infection - lymph vessels
Images
Staphylococcal lymphangitis
References
Pasternack MS, Swartz MN. Lymphadenitis and lymphangitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 95.
Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF, Dellinger EP, Goldstein EJ, Gorbach SL, Hirschmann JV, Kaplan SL, Montoya JG, Wade JC; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of skin and soft tissue infections: 2014 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Clin Infect Dis.
2014 Jul 15;59(2):e10-52. Erratum in:
Clin Infect Dis.
2015 May 1;60(9):1448. Dosage error in article text. PMID: 24973422.
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24973422/
.
Review Date 5/19/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bacterial Infections
Lymphatic Diseases