Cerebral hypoxia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Cerebral hypoxia
Cerebral hypoxia
Cerebral hypoxia occurs when there is not enough oxygen getting to the brain. The brain needs a constant supply of oxygen and nutrients to function.
Cerebral hypoxia refers to the largest parts of the brain, called the cerebral hemispheres. However, the term is often used to refer to a lack of oxygen supply to any part of or all of the brain.
Causes
In cerebral hypoxia, sometimes only the oxygen supply is interrupted. This can be caused by:
Breathing in smoke (smoke inhalation), such as during a fire
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Choking
Diseases that prevent movement (paralysis) of the breathing muscles, such as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS)
High altitude exposure
Pressure on (compression) the windpipe (trachea)
Strangulation
In other cases, both oxygen and nutrient supply are stopped, caused by:
Cardiac arrest
(when the heart stops pumping)
Cardiac
arrhythmia
(heart rhythm problems)
Complications of
general anesthesia
Drowning
Illegal drug or medicine overdose
Injuries to a newborn that occurred before, during, or soon after birth, such as
cerebral palsy
Prolonged
seizure
(status epilepticus)
Stroke
Very
low blood pressure
Brain cells are very sensitive to a lack of oxygen. Some brain cells start dying less than 5 minutes after their oxygen supply disappears. As a result, brain hypoxia can rapidly cause severe brain damage or death.
Symptoms
Symptoms of mild cerebral hypoxia include:
Change in attention (inattentiveness)
Poor judgment
Speech disorder
Uncoordinated movement
Symptoms of severe cerebral hypoxia include:
Complete unawareness and unresponsiveness (
coma
)
No breathing
No response of the pupils of the eye to light
Exams and Tests
Cerebral hypoxia can usually be diagnosed based on the person's medical history and a physical exam. Tests are done to determine the cause of the hypoxia, and may include:
Angiogram of the brain
Blood tests, including
arterial blood gases
and blood chemical levels
CT scan of the head
Echocardiogram
, which uses ultrasound to view the heart
Electrocardiogram
(ECG), a measurement of the heart's electrical activity
Electroencephalogram
(EEG), a test of brain waves that can identify seizures and show how well brain cells work
Evoked potentials
, a test that determines whether certain sensations, such as vision and touch, reach the brain
Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of the head
If only blood pressure and heart function remain, the brain may be completely dead.
Treatment
Cerebral hypoxia is an emergency condition that needs to be treated right away. The sooner the oxygen supply is restored to the brain, the lower the risk for severe brain damage and death.
Treatment depends on the cause of the hypoxia. Basic life support is most important. Treatment involves:
Breathing assistance (mechanical ventilation) and oxygen
Regulating the heart rate and rhythm
Fluids, blood products, or medicines to raise blood pressure if it is low
Medicines or general anesthetics to calm seizures
Sometimes a person with cerebral hypoxia is cooled to slow down the activity of the brain cells and decrease their need for oxygen. However, the benefit of this treatment has not been firmly established.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the extent of the brain injury. This is determined by how long the brain lacked oxygen, and whether nutrition to the brain was also affected.
If the brain lacked oxygen for only a brief period, a coma may be reversible and the person may have a full or partial return of function. Some people recover many functions, but have abnormal movements, such as twitching or jerking, called myoclonus. Seizures may sometimes occur, and may be continuous (status epilepticus).
Most people who make a full recovery were only briefly unconscious. The longer a person is unconscious, the higher the risk for death or brain death, and the lower the chances of recovery.
Possible Complications
Complications of cerebral hypoxia include a prolonged vegetative state. This means the person may have basic life functions, such as breathing, blood pressure, sleep-wake cycle, and eye opening, but the person is not alert and does not respond to their surroundings. Such people usually die within a year, although some may survive longer.
The length of survival depends partly on how much care is taken to prevent other problems. Major complications may include:
Bed sores
Clots in the veins (
deep vein thrombosis
)
Lung infections (pneumonia)
Malnutrition
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Cerebral hypoxia is a medical emergency. Call 911 or the local emergency number immediately if someone is losing consciousness or has other symptoms of cerebral hypoxia.
Prevention
Prevention depends on the specific cause of hypoxia. Unfortunately, hypoxia is usually unexpected. This makes the condition somewhat difficult to prevent.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) can be lifesaving, especially when it is started right away.
Alternative Names
Hypoxic encephalopathy; Anoxic encephalopathy
References
Fugate JE, Wijdicks EFM. Anoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 83.
Greer DM, Bernat JL. Coma, disorders of consciousness, and brain death. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 373.
Lumb AB, Thomas C. Hypoxia. In: Lumb AB, Thomas C, eds.
Nunn and Lumb's Applied Respiratory Physiology
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 23.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Brain Diseases
Coma
Traumatic Brain Injury