Flushable reagent stool blood test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Flushable reagent stool blood test
Flushable reagent stool blood test
Flushable reagent stool blood test is an at-home test to detect invisible blood in the stool.
How the Test is Performed
This test is performed at home with disposable pads. You can buy the pads at the drug store without a prescription. Brand names include EZ-Detect, HomeChek Reveal, and ColoCARE.
You do not handle stool directly with this test. You simply note any changes you see on a card and then mail the results card to your health care provider.
To do the test:
Urinate if you need to, then flush the toilet before having a bowel movement.
After the bowel movement, place the disposable pad in the toilet.
Watch for a change of color on the test area of the pad. Results will appear in about 2 minutes.
Note the results on the card provided, then flush the pad away.
Repeat for the next two bowel movements.
The different tests use different ways to check for water quality. Check the package for instructions.
How to Prepare for the Test
Some medicines may interfere with this test.
Check with your provider about changes in your medicines you may need to make. Never stop taking a medicine or change how you take it without first talking to your provider.
Check the test package to see if there are any foods you need to stop eating before doing the test.
How the Test will Feel
This test involves only normal bowel functions, and there is no discomfort.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is mainly performed for
colorectal cancer screening
. It may also be done in the case of low levels of red blood cells (anemia).
Normal Results
A negative result is normal. It means you have no evidence of gastrointestinal bleeding.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Talk to your provider about your test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results of the flushable pad mean there is bleeding present somewhere in the digestive tract, which may be caused by:
Swollen, fragile blood vessels in the colon that may result in blood loss
Colon cancer
Colon polyps
Enlarged veins, called
varices
, in the walls of the esophagus (the tube that connects your throat to your stomach) that bleed
Inflamed or swollen lining of the stomach or the esophagus
Infections in the stomach or intestines
Hemorrhoids
Crohn disease
or ulcerative colitis
Ulcer in the stomach or first part of the intestines
Other causes of a positive test, which do not indicate a problem in the gastrointestinal tract, include:
Coughing up and then swallowing blood
Nose bleed
Abnormal test results require follow-up with your doctor. You may need a visit with a gastroenterologist, a specially trained doctor of the digestive system, to discuss further testing. Or, your primary provider may wish to recheck your stool for blood with a special test called a fecal immunochemical test (FIT.)
Risks
The test can have false-positive (the test indicates a problem when there actually is none) or false-negative (the test indicates there is not a problem, but there is) results. This is similar to other stool smear tests which can also give false results.
Alternative Names
Stool occult blood test - flushable home test; Fecal occult blood test - flushable home test
References
de Kanter C, Dhaliwal S, Hawks M. Colorectal cancer screening: updated guidelines from the American College of Gastroenterology.
Am Fam Physician
. 2022;105(3):327-329. PMID: 335289558
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35289558/
.
Lawler M, Johnston B, Van Schaeybroeck S, et al. Colorectal cancer. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 74.
National Cancer Institute website. Colorectal cancer prevention (PDQ) - health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/colorectal/hp/colorectal-prevention-pdq
. Updated April 11, 2025. Accessed August 12, 2025.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network website. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): colorectal cancer screening. Version 2.2025 - June 24, 2025.
www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/colorectal_screening.pdf
. Accessed August 12, 2025.
Patel SG, May FP, Anderson JC, et al. Updates on age to start and stop colorectal cancer screening: recommendations from the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on colorectal cancer.
Gastroenterology
. 2022;162(1):285-299. PMID: 34794816
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34794816/
.
Savides TJ, Jensen DM. Gastrointestinal bleeding. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 20.
Shaukat A, Kahi CJ, Burke CA, Rabeneck L, Sauer BG, Rex DK. ACG clinical guidelines: colorectal cancer screening 2021.
Am J Gastroenterol
. 2021;116(3):458-479. PMID: 33657038
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33657038/
.
US Preventive Services Task Force website. Final recommendation statement. Colorectal cancer: screening.
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/colorectal-cancer-screening
. Published May 18, 2021. Accessed April 2, 2025.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Gastroenterologist, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 08/12/2025.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Colorectal Cancer
Esophagus Disorders
Stomach Disorders