Baking soda overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Baking soda overdose
Baking soda overdose
Baking soda is a cooking product that helps batter rise. This article discusses the effects of swallowing a large amount of baking soda. Baking soda is considered nontoxic when it is used in cooking and baking.
Soda loading refers to drinking baking soda. Some athletes and coaches believe that drinking baking soda before competition helps a person perform for longer periods of time. This is very dangerous. Besides having side effects, it makes the athletes
unable
to perform.
This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual overdose. If you have an overdose, you should call your local emergency number (such as 911) or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Sodium bicarbonate can be poisonous in large amounts.
Where Found
Baking soda contains sodium bicarbonate.
Symptoms
Symptoms of baking soda overdose include:
Constipation
Convulsions
Diarrhea
Feeling of being full
Frequent urination
Irritability
Muscle spasms
Muscle weakness
Vomiting
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free
Poison Help hotline
(1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal if a large amount was recently ingested
Blood and urine tests
ECG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (through a vein)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome of a baking soda overdose depends on many factors, including:
Amount of baking soda swallowed
Time between the overdose and when treatment began
Person's age, weight, and overall health
Type of complications that develop
If nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are not controlled, serious dehydration and body chemical and mineral (electrolyte)
imbalances may occur. These can cause heart rhythm disturbances.
Keep all household food items in their original containers and out of the reach of children. Any white powder may look like sugar to a child. This mix up can lead to accidental ingestion.
Alternative Names
Soda loading
References
Thomas SHL. Poisoning. In: Penman ID, Ralston SH, Strachan MWJ, Hobson RP, eds.
Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 10.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.