Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome (WFS) is a group of symptoms caused when the adrenal glands fail to function normally. This occurs as a result of bleeding into the glands.
Causes
The
adrenal glands
are two triangle-shaped glands. One gland is located on top of each kidney. The adrenal glands produce and release different hormones that the body needs to function normally. The adrenal glands can be affected by many diseases, such as infections like WFS.
WFS is caused by severe infection with meningococcus bacteria or other bacteria such as:
Group B streptococcus
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Staphylococcus aureus
Symptoms
Symptoms occur suddenly. They are due to the bacteria growing in large numbers inside the body. Symptoms include:
Fever and chills
Joint and muscle pain
Headache
Vomiting
The infection with bacteria causes bleeding throughout the body, which causes:
A rash throughout the body
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
in which small blood clots cut off blood supply to the organs
Septic shock
Bleeding into the adrenal glands makes the glands unable to produce enough adrenal hormones. This is called adrenal crisis, and it leads to symptoms such as:
Dizziness, weakness
Very low blood pressure
Very fast heart rate
Confusion or coma
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms.
Blood tests will be done to confirm a bacterial infection. Tests may include:
Blood culture
Complete blood count
with
differential
Blood clotting studies
If your provider suspects the infection is caused by meningococcus bacteria, other tests that may be done include:
Lumbar puncture
to get a sample of spinal fluid for culture
Skin biopsy
and
Gram stain
Urine analysis
Tests that may be ordered to help diagnose acute adrenal crisis include:
ACTH (cosyntropin) stimulation test
Cortisol blood test
Blood sugar
Potassium blood test
Sodium blood test
Blood pH test
Treatment
Antibiotics are started right away to treat the bacterial infection. Glucocorticoid medicines will also be given to treat adrenal gland insufficiency. Supportive treatments will be needed for other symptoms.
Outlook (Prognosis)
WFS is fatal unless treatment for the bacterial infection is started right away and glucocorticoid drugs are given.
Prevention
To prevent WFS caused by meningococcal bacteria, a
vaccine
is available.
Alternative Names
Fulminant meningococcemia - Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome; Fulminant meningococcal sepsis - Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome; Hemorrhagic adrenalitis
Images
Meningococcal lesions on the back
Adrenal gland hormone secretion
References
Newell-Price JDC, Auchus RJ. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Koenig RJ, Rosen CJ, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 15.
Stephens DS. Neisseria meningitides. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 211.
Review Date 8/26/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Adrenal Gland Disorders
Meningitis
Meningococcal Disease