CPK isoenzymes test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
CPK isoenzymes test
CPK isoenzymes test
The creatine phosphokinase (CPK) isoenzymes test measures the different forms of CPK in the blood. CPK is an enzyme found mainly in the heart, brain, and skeletal muscle.
How the Test is Performed
A blood sample is needed. This may be taken from a vein. The test is called a
venipuncture
.
If you are in the hospital, this test may be repeated over 2 or 3 days. A significant rise or fall in the total CPK or CPK isoenzymes can help your health care provider diagnose certain conditions.
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is needed in most cases.
Tell your provider about all the medicines you are taking. Some drugs can interfere with test results. Drugs that can increase CPK measurements include the following:
Alcohol
Amphotericin B
Certain anesthetics
Cocaine
Fibrate medicines
Statins
Steroids, such as dexamethasone
This list is not all-inclusive.
How the Test will Feel
You may feel slight pain when the needle is inserted to draw blood. Some people feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is done if a
CPK test
shows that your total CPK level is elevated. CPK isoenzyme testing can help find the exact source of the damaged tissue.
CPK is made of three slightly different substances:
CPK-1 (also called CPK-BB) is found mostly in the brain and lungs
CPK-2 (also called CPK-MB) is found mostly in the heart
CPK-3 (also called CPK-MM) is found mostly in skeletal muscle
What Abnormal Results Mean
Higher-than-normal CPK-1 levels:
Because CPK-1 is found mostly in the brain and lungs, injury to either of these areas can increase CPK-1 levels. Increased CPK-1 levels may be due to:
Brain cancer
Brain injury
(due to any type of injury including, stroke, or bleeding in the brain)
Electroconvulsive therapy
Pulmonary infarction
Seizure
Higher-than-normal CPK-2 levels:
CPK-2 levels rise 3 to 6 hours after a
heart attack
. If there is no further heart muscle damage, the level peaks at 12 to 24 hours and returns to normal 12 to 48 hours after tissue death.
Increased CPK-2 levels may also be due to:
Electrical injuries
Heart
defibrillation
(purposeful shocking of the heart by medical personnel)
Heart injury (for instance, from a car accident)
Inflammation of the heart muscle usually due to a virus (
myocarditis
)
Open heart surgery
Higher-than-normal CPK-3 levels are most often a sign of muscle injury or muscle stress. They may be due to:
Crush injuries
Dermatomyositis or polymyositis
Muscle damage due to medicines or being immobile for a long time (
rhabdomyolysis
)
Muscular dystrophy
Myopathy
Myositis
(skeletal muscle inflammation)
Receiving many intramuscular injections
Recent nerve and muscle function testing (
electromyography
)
Recent seizures
Recent surgery
Rhabdomyolysis
Strenuous exercise
Considerations
Factors that can affect test results include
cardiac catheterization
, intramuscular injections, recent surgery, and vigorous and prolonged exercise or immobilization.
Isoenzyme testing for specific conditions is about 90% accurate.
Alternative Names
Creatine phosphokinase - isoenzymes; Creatine kinase - isoenzymes; CK - isoenzymes; Heart attack - CPK; Crush - CPK
Images
Blood test
References
Mccullough PA. Interface between renal disease and cardiovascular illness. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 101.
Pincus MR, Carty RP. Clinical enzymology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 21.
Selcen D. Muscle diseases. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 389.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Chest Pain
Heart Attack
Heart Diseases
Muscular Dystrophy
Seizures
Traumatic Brain Injury