Breathing - slowed or stopped: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Breathing - slowed or stopped
Breathing - slowed or stopped
Breathing that stops from any cause is called apnea. Slowed breathing is called bradypnea. Labored or difficult breathing is known as dyspnea.
Considerations
Apnea can come and go and be temporary. This can occur with obstructive sleep apnea, for example.
Prolonged apnea means a person has stopped breathing. If the heart is still active, the condition is known as respiratory arrest. This is a life-threatening event that requires immediate medical attention and first aid.
Prolonged apnea with no heart activity in a person who is not responsive is called cardiac (or cardiopulmonary) arrest. In infants and children, the most common cause of cardiac arrest is respiratory arrest. In adults, the opposite usually occurs, cardiac arrest most often leads to respiratory arrest.
Causes
Breathing difficulty can occur for many reasons. The most common causes of apnea in infants and small children are different from the most common causes in adults.
Common causes of breathing difficulties in infants and young children include:
Asthma
Bronchiolitis
(inflammation and narrowing of the smaller breathing structures in the lungs)
Choking
Encephalitis
(brain inflammation and infection that affects vital brain functions)
Gastroesophageal reflux
(heartburn)
Holding one's breath
Meningitis
(inflammation and infection of the tissue lining the brain and spinal cord)
Pneumonia
Premature birth
Seizures
Common causes of breathing trouble (dyspnea) in adults include:
Allergic reaction that causes tongue, throat, or other airway swelling
Asthma or other lung diseases
Cardiac arrest
Choking
Drug overdose, especially due to alcohol, narcotic painkillers, barbiturates, anesthetics, and other depressants
Fluid in the lungs
Heart attack
Irregular heart beat
Metabolic (body chemical, mineral, and acid-base) disorders
Obstructive sleep apnea
Other causes of apnea include:
Cardiac arrest
Head injury
or injury to the neck, mouth, and larynx (voice box)
Near drowning
Stroke
and other brain and nervous system (neurological) disorders
Injury to the chest wall, heart, or lungs
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Seek immediate medical attention or call your local emergency number (such as 911) if a person with any type of breathing problem:
Becomes limp
Has a seizure
Is not alert (loses consciousness)
Remains drowsy
Turns blue
If a person has stopped breathing, call for emergency help and perform
CPR
(if you know how). When in a public place, look for an automated external defibrillator (AED) and follow the directions.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
CPR or other emergency measures will be done in an emergency room or by an ambulance emergency medical technician (EMT) or paramedic.
Once the person is stable, the health care provider will do a physical exam, which includes listening to
heart sounds
and breath sounds.
Questions will be asked about the person's medical history and symptoms, including:
TIME PATTERN
Has this ever happened before?
How long did the event last?
Has the person had repeated, brief episodes of apnea?
Did the episode end with a sudden deep, snorting breath?
Did the episode occur while awake or asleep?
RECENT HEALTH HISTORY
Has the person had a recent accident or injury?
Has the person been ill recently?
Was there any breathing difficulty before breathing stopped?
What other symptoms have you noticed?
What medicines does the person take?
Does the person use street or recreational drugs?
Diagnostic tests and treatments that may be done include:
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator)
Blood and urine tests
Chest tube
Chest x-ray
CT scan
Defibrillation (electrical shock to the heart)
Electrocardiogram
(ECG), or heart tracing
Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms, including antidotes to reverse the effects of a poisoning or overdose
Alternative Names
Respiration slowed or stopped; Not breathing; Respiratory arrest; Apnea
References
Easter JS. Pediatric resuscitation. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 158.
Haas NL, Kurz MC. Adult resuscitation. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 5.
Morgan RW, Topjian AA. Pediatric cardiorespiratory emergencies and resuscitation. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 79.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Breathing Problems