Thoracentesis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Thoracentesis
Thoracentesis
Thoracentesis is a procedure to remove fluid from the space between the lining of the outside of the lungs (pleura) and the wall of the chest.
How the Test is Performed
The test is done in the following way:
You sit on a bed or on the edge of a chair or bed. Your head and arms rest on a table.
The skin around the procedure site is cleaned. A local numbing medicine (anesthetic) is injected into the skin.
A needle is placed through the skin and muscles of the chest wall into the space around the lungs, called the pleural space. Your health care provider will likely use
ultrasound
to find the best spot to insert the needle.
You may be asked to hold your breath or breathe out during the procedure.
You should not cough, breathe deeply, or move during the test to avoid injury to the lung.
Fluid is drawn out with the needle or a temporary catheter is placed to allow the fluid to be removed.
The needle or catheter is removed and the area is bandaged.
A chest x-ray or ultrasound is usually done after the thoracentesis to check for injury to the lung.
The fluid may be sent to a laboratory for testing (
pleural fluid analysis
).
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is needed before the test. A
chest x-ray
or ultrasound will be done before and after the test.
How the Test will Feel
You will feel a stinging sensation when the local anesthetic is injected. You may feel pain or pressure when the needle is inserted into the pleural space.
Tell your provider if you feel
short of breath
or have
chest pain
, during or after the procedure.
Why the Test is Performed
Normally, very little fluid is in the pleural space. A buildup of too much fluid between the layers of the pleura is called a
pleural effusion
.
The test is performed to determine the cause of the extra fluid and to relieve symptoms from the fluid buildup.
Normal Results
Normally the pleural cavity contains only a very small amount of fluid.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Testing the fluid will help your provider determine the cause of pleural effusion. Possible causes include:
Metastatic cancer
Liver failure
Heart failure
Low blood protein levels
Kidney disease
Chest trauma or post-chest surgery
Asbestos-related pleural effusion
Collagen vascular disease (group of diseases in which the body's immune system attacks its own tissues)
Medicine reactions
Collection of blood in the pleural space (
hemothorax
)
Lung cancer
Swelling and inflammation of the pancreas (
pancreatitis
)
Pneumonia
Blockage of an artery in the lungs (
pulmonary embolism
)
Severely
underactive thyroid gland
If your provider suspects that you have an infection, a culture of the fluid may be done to test for bacteria and other possible infectious agents.
Risks
Risks may include any of the following:
Bleeding
Infection
Collapsed lung (
pneumothorax
)
Respiratory distress
Considerations
A chest x-ray or ultrasound is commonly done after the procedure to detect possible complications.
Alternative Names
Pleural fluid aspiration; Pleural tap
References
Blok BK. Thoracentesis. In: Roberts JR, Custalow CB, Thomsen TW, eds.
Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine and Acute Care
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 9.
Ruhl TS, Good JL. Thoracentesis. In: Fowler GC, Choby BA, Iyengar D, et al, eds.
Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 218.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pleural Disorders