Colitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Colitis
Colitis
Colitis is swelling (inflammation) of the large intestine (colon).
Causes
Most of the time, the cause of colitis is not known.
Causes of colitis include:
Infections caused by a virus or a parasite
Food poisoning
due to bacteria
Crohn disease
Ulcerative colitis
Lack of blood flow to the colon (ischemic colitis)
Past radiation to the colon (radiation colitis and strictures)
Necrotizing enterocolitis
in newborns
Pseudomembranous colitis
caused by
Clostridium difficile
infection  (now called
Clostridiodes difficile
)
Symptoms
Symptoms can include:
Abdominal pain
and
bloating
that  may be constant or come and go
Bloody stools

Constant urge to have a bowel movement (tenesmus)
Dehydration
Diarrhea
Fever
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will perform a physical exam. You will also be asked questions about your symptoms, such as:
How long have you had the symptoms?
How severe is your pain?
How often do you have pain and how long does it last?
How often do you have diarrhea?
Have you traveled recently?
Have you taken antibiotics recently?
Your provider may recommend a flexible
sigmoidoscopy
or
colonoscopy
. During this test, a flexible tube is inserted through your rectum to examine your colon. You may have biopsies taken during this exam. Biopsies may show changes related to inflammation. This can help determine the cause of colitis.
Other studies that can identify colitis include:
CT scan of the abdomen
MRI of the abdomen
Barium enema
Stool culture
Stool examination for ova and parasites
Treatment
Your treatment will depend on the cause of the disease.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the cause of the problem.
Crohn disease is a chronic condition which has no cure but can be controlled. Biologic agents are very effective in controlling symptoms of Crohn colitis.
Ulcerative colitis can usually be controlled with medicines. If not controlled, it can be cured by surgically removing the colon.
Viral, bacterial, and parasitic colitis can be cured with appropriate medicines.
Pseudomembranous colitis can usually be cured with appropriate antibiotics.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Bleeding with bowel movements
Perforation of the colon
Toxic megacolon
Sore (ulceration)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have symptoms such as:
Abdominal pain that does not get better
Blood in the stool or stools that look black
Diarrhea or vomiting that does not go away
Swollen abdomen
Images
Ulcerative colitis
Large intestine (colon)
Crohn disease - X-ray
Inflammatory bowel disease
Large intestine
References
Ananthakrishnan AN, Regueiro MD. Management of inflammatory bowel diseases. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.
11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 116.
Lichtenstein GR. Inflammatory bowel disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 127.
Pardi DS, Cotter TG. Other diseases of the colon. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 128.
Review Date 8/7/2023
Updated by: Michael M. Phillips, MD, Emeritus Professor of Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Colonic Diseases