Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an inherited disorder of the blood vessels that can cause excessive bleeding.
Causes
HHT is passed down through families in an
autosomal dominant pattern
. If a parent has this condition, there is a 50% chance of passing on the gene to a child, regardless of sex of the parent or child. This means the abnormal gene is needed from only one parent in order to inherit the disease.
Scientists have identified four genes involved in this condition. All of these genes appear to be important for blood vessels to develop properly. A variant in any one of these genes can cause a person to have HHT.
Symptoms
People with HHT can develop abnormal blood vessels in several areas of the body. These vessels are called arteriovenous malformations (AVMs).
If they are on the skin, they are called
telangiectasias
. The most common sites include the lips, tongue, ears, and fingers. The abnormal blood vessels can also develop in the brain, lungs, liver, intestines, or other areas.
Symptoms of this syndrome include:
Frequent
nosebleeds
in children
Bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract
(GI), including loss of blood in the stool, or dark or black stools
Seizures
or unexplained, small
strokes
(from bleeding into the brain)
Shortness of breath
Enlarged liver
Heart failure
Anemia
caused by low iron
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical examination and ask about your symptoms. An experienced provider can detect telangiectases during a physical examination. There is often a family history of this condition.
Tests include:
Blood gas tests
Blood tests
Imaging test of the heart called an
echocardiogram
Endoscopy
, which uses a tiny camera attached to a thin tube to look inside your body
MRI
to detect AVMs in the brain
CT
or
ultrasound
scans to detect AVMs in the liver
Genetic testing is available to look for changes in genes associated with this syndrome.
Treatment
Treatments may include:
Surgery to treat bleeding in some areas
Electrocautery
(heating tissue with electricity) or laser surgery to treat frequent or heavy nosebleeds
Endovascular embolization
(injecting a substance through a thin tube) to treat abnormal blood vessels in the brain and other parts of the body
Some people respond to estrogen therapy, which can reduce bleeding episodes. Iron may also be given if there is a lot of blood loss, leading to anemia. Avoid taking blood-thinning medicines. Some medicines that affect blood vessel development are being studied as possible future treatments.
Some people may need to take antibiotics before having dental work or surgery. People with lung AVMs should avoid scuba diving to prevent decompression sickness (the bends). Ask your provider what other precautions you should take.
Support Groups
More information and support for people with HHT disorder and their families can be found at:
Cure HHT --
curehht.org/
National Organization for Rare Disorders --
rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/hereditary-hemorrhagic-telangiectasia/
Outlook (Prognosis)
People with this syndrome can live a completely normal lifespan, depending on where in the body the AVMs are located.
Possible Complications
These complications can occur:
Heart failure
High blood pressure in the lungs (
pulmonary hypertension
)
Internal bleeding
Shortness of breath
Stroke
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you or your child has frequent nose bleeds or other signs of this disease.
Prevention
Genetic counseling
is recommended for couples who want to have children and who have a family history of HHT. If you have this condition, medical treatments can prevent certain types of strokes and heart failure.
Alternative Names
HHT; Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome; Osler-Weber-Rendu disease; Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome
Images
Circulatory system
Arteries of the brain
References
Cappell MS, Lebwohl O. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Coulson IH, Murrell DF, eds.
Treatment of Skin Disease.
6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 102.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT). About hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT).
www.cdc.gov/hht/about/index.html/
. Updated June 18, 2024. Accessed April 16, 2025.
Kwah J, Brandt LJ. Vascular lesions of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 38.
McDonald J, Stevenson DA. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. 2000 Jun 26 [updated 2021 Nov 24]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, eds.
GeneReviews
[Internet]. Seattle, WA: University of Washington. PMID: 20301525
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20301525/
.
Review Date 4/8/2025
Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Associate Professor in Medical Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Arteriovenous Malformations
Bleeding Disorders