Abscess: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Abscess
Abscess
An abscess is a collection of pus in any part of the body. In most cases, the area around an abscess is swollen and inflamed.
Causes
Abscesses occur when an area of tissue becomes infected and the body's immune system tries to fight and contain it. White blood cells (WBCs) move through the walls of the blood vessels into the area of the infection and collect in the damaged tissue. During this process, pus forms. Pus is the buildup of fluid, living and dead white blood cells, dead tissue, and bacteria or other foreign substances.
Abscesses can form in almost any part of the body. The skin, under the skin, and around the teeth are the most common sites. Abscesses may be caused by bacteria, parasites, and foreign substances.
Abscesses in the skin are easy to see. They are red, raised, and painful. Abscesses in other areas of the body may not be seen, but they may cause organ damage.
Some types and locations of abscesses include:
Abdominal abscess
Amebic liver abscess
Anorectal abscess
Bartholin gland abscess
Brain abscess
Epidural abscess
Peritonsillar abscess
Pyogenic liver abscess
Spinal cord abscess
Subcutaneous (skin) abscess
Tooth abscess
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam, focusing on the symptoms of the abscess.
Tests to locate the abscess include:
Ultrasound
CT scan
MRI scan
X-ray
(mainly for tooth abscess)
Often, a sample of fluid will be taken from the abscess and tested to see what type of germ is causing the problem.
Treatment
Treatment varies, but often surgery is needed to drain the abscess. Antibiotics can also be used.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you think that you have any type of abscess. Contact your dentist if you think that you have a tooth abscess.
Prevention
Preventing abscesses depends on where they develop. For example, good hygiene can help prevent skin abscesses.
Dental hygiene
and routine care will prevent tooth abscesses.
Images
Pyogenic abscess
Tooth abscess
Intra-abdominal abscess - CT scan
References
Ambrose G, Berlin D. Incision and drainage. In: Roberts JR, Custalow CB, Thomsen TW, eds.
Roberts & Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine and Acute Care
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 37.
De Prisco G, Celinski S, Spak CW. Abdominal abscesses and gastrointestinal fistulas. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 29.
Gea-Banacloche JC, Tunkel AR. Brain abscess. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 90.
Review Date 8/29/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Abscess