Small bowel bacterial overgrowth: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth is a condition in which very large numbers of bacteria grow in the small intestine.
Causes
Most of the time, unlike the large intestine, the small intestine does not have a large number of bacteria. Excess bacteria in the small intestine may use up the nutrients needed by the body. As a result, a person may become
malnourished
.
The breakdown of nutrients by the excess bacteria can also damage the lining of the small intestine. This can make it even harder for the body to absorb nutrients.
Conditions that can lead to overgrowth of bacteria in the small intestine include:
Complications of diseases or surgery that create pouches or blockages in the small intestine.
Crohn disease
is one of these conditions.
Diseases that lead to decreased movement of the small bowel, such as
diabetes
and
scleroderma
.
Immunodeficiency, such as AIDS or immunoglobulin deficiency.
Short bowel syndrome
caused by surgical removal of the small intestine.
Small bowel diverticulosis, in which small, or, at times, large sacs occur in the wall of the intestine. These sacs allow too many bacteria to grow.
Surgical procedures that create a loop of small intestine where excess bacteria can grow. An example is a Billroth II type of stomach removal (
gastrectomy
).
Some cases of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
Symptoms
The most common symptoms are:
Abdominal fullness
Abdominal pain and cramps
Bloating
Diarrhea (most often watery)
Gassiness
Other symptoms may include:
Fatty stool
Weight loss
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history. Tests may include:
Blood chemistry tests (such as albumin level)
Complete blood count (
CBC
)
Fecal fat test
Small intestine
endoscopy
Vitamin levels in the blood
Small intestine biopsy or culture
Special breath tests
Treatment
The goal is to treat the cause of the bacterial overgrowth. Treatment may include:
Antibiotics
Medicines that speed intestinal movement
Intravenous (IV) fluids
Nutrition given through a vein (total parenteral nutrition or TPN) in a malnourished person
A lactose-free diet can be helpful.
Possible Complications
Severe cases lead to malnutrition. Other possible complications include:
Dehydration
Excess bleeding or other problems due to vitamin deficiency
Liver disease
Osteomalacia
or
osteoporosis
Inflammation of the intestine
Alternative Names
Overgrowth - intestinal bacteria; Bacterial overgrowth - intestine; Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth; SIBO
Images
Small intestine
References
Lacy BE, DiBaise JK. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 105.
Semrad CE. Approach to the patient with diarrhea and malabsorption. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 126.
Review Date 5/14/2024
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Department of Gastroenterology, Aria - Jefferson Health Torresdale, Jefferson Digestive Diseases Network, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Malabsorption Syndromes
Small Intestine Disorders