Amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose
Amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose
Amitriptyline hydrochloride is a type of prescription medicine called a tricyclic antidepressant. It is used to treat depression. Amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an
overdose
, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Amitriptyline can be harmful in large amounts.
Where Found
Amitriptyline hydrochloride is a prescription medicine. It is sold under these brand names:
Adepril
Emitrip
Enovil
Trepiline
Tryptanol
Vanatrip
Other medicines may also contain amitriptyline hydrochloride.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of an amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose in different parts of the body. These symptoms may occur more often or be more severe in people who also take certain other medicines that affect serotonin, a chemical in the brain.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Slowed, labored breathing
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Cannot urinate
Urine does not flow easily
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Blurred vision
Dilated (wide) pupils
Eye pain in people at risk for a type of
glaucoma
Dry mouth
HEART AND BLOOD
Irregular heart rate
Low blood pressure
Rapid heartbeat
Shock
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Coma
Seizures
Drowsiness
Hallucinations
Headache
Inability to concentrate
Lack of alertness (
stupor
)
Muscle rigidity or stiffness of the limbs
Restlessness
Uncoordinated movement
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Constipation
Vomiting
Home Care
This can be a very serious overdose. Seek medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
CT scan
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicine called an antidote to reverse the effects of the poison and treat symptoms, such as sodium bicarbonate or lidocaine
Activated charcoal
Laxatives
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a
breathing machine
(ventilator)
Outlook (Prognosis)
An amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose can be very serious.
People who swallow too much of this medicine are almost always admitted to the hospital.
How well someone does depends on how much of the medicine was swallowed and how quickly treatment is given. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance of recovery. Complications such as heart rhythm disturbances, pneumonia, muscle damage from lying on a hard surface for a long period of time, or brain damage from lack of oxygen may result in permanent disability. Death can occur.
Alternative Names
Elavil overdose; Adepril overdose; Endep overdose; Enovil overdose; Trepiline overdose
References
Aronson JK. Tricyclic antidepressants. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:146-169.
Levine MD, Ruha AM. Antidepressants. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 141.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Antidepressants