Head circumference: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Head circumference
Head circumference
Head circumference is a measurement of a child's head around its largest area. It measures the distance from above the eyebrows and ears and around the back of the head.
Information
During routine checkups, the distance is measured in centimeters or inches and compared with:
Past measurements of a child's head circumference.
Normal ranges for a child's sex and age (weeks, months), based on values that experts have obtained for normal growth rates of infants' and children's heads.
Measurement of the head circumference is an important part of routine well-baby care. During the well-baby exam, a change from the expected normal head growth may alert your health care provider of a possible problem.
For example, a head that is larger than normal or that is increasing in size faster than normal may be a sign of several problems, including water on the brain (
hydrocephalus
).
A very small head size (called
microcephaly
) or very slow growth rate may be a sign that the brain is not developing properly.
Alternative Names
Occipital-frontal circumference
References
Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW. Growth and nutrition. In: Ball JW, Dains JE, Flynn JA, Solomon BS, Stewart RW, eds.
Siedel's Guide to Physical Examination
. 10th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2023:chap 8.
Bamba V, Kelly A. Assessment of growth. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 27.
Riddell A. Children and adolescents. In: Glynn M, Drake WM, eds.
Hutchison's Clinical Methods
. 25th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 6.
Review Date 1/17/2025
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.