Colorectal cancer: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Colorectal cancer
Colorectal cancer
Colorectal cancer is cancer that starts in the large intestine (colon) or the rectum (end of the colon). It is also sometimes simply called colon cancer.
In the United States, colorectal cancer is one of the leading causes of deaths due to cancer. Early diagnosis can often lead to a complete cure.
Causes
Nearly all colorectal cancers begin as
noncancerous (benign) lumps (polyps)
in the lining of the colon and rectum. These can slowly develop into cancer.
You have a higher risk for colorectal cancer if you:
Are age 45 or older
Drink alcohol
Smoke tobacco
Are overweight or have
obesity
Are African American or of eastern European descent
Eat a lot of red or processed meats
Eat a
low-fiber and high-fat diet
Have a diet low in fruits and vegetables
Have colorectal polyps
Have inflammatory bowel disease (
Crohn disease
or
ulcerative colitis
)
Have a family history of colorectal cancer
Some inherited diseases also increase the risk of developing colorectal cancer. One of the most common is called Lynch syndrome.
Symptoms
Many cases of colon cancer have no symptoms. If there are symptoms, the following may indicate colon cancer:
Abdominal pain and tenderness
in the lower abdomen
Blood in the stool
Diarrhea
, constipation, or other change in bowel habits
Narrow stools
Weight loss
with no known reason
Exams and Tests
Through
screening tests, colon cancer
can be detected before symptoms develop. This is when the cancer is most curable. Abnormal stool screening tests should be followed up with a colonoscopy, which can see the entire colon.
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and press on your belly area. The physical exam rarely shows any problems, although your provider may feel a lump (mass) in the abdomen. A rectal exam may reveal a mass in people with rectal cancer, but not colon cancer.
Blood tests may be done for those diagnosed with colorectal cancer, including:
Complete blood count
(CBC) to check for anemia
Liver function tests
If you are diagnosed with colorectal cancer, more tests will be done to see if the cancer has spread. This is called
staging
.
CT
or
MRI
scans of the abdomen, pelvic area, or chest may be used to stage the cancer. Sometimes,
PET
scans are also used.
Stages of colorectal cancer are:
Stage 0: Cancer is only on the innermost layer of the lining of the intestine
Stage I: Cancer is in the inner layers of the colon
Stage II: Cancer has spread through the muscle wall of the colon
Stage III: Cancer has spread to the lymph nodes near the colon
Stage IV: Cancer spread to other organs, such as the liver or lungs
Blood tests to detect tumor markers, such as
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
may help your provider monitor your progress during and after treatment.
Treatment
Treatment depends on many things, including the stage of the cancer. Treatments may include:
Endoscopic surgery (less invasive surgery using a lighted, flexible tube)
Surgery
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
- used in some people with rectal cancer
Immunotherapy
Targeted therapy
SURGERY
Stage 0 colon cancer may be treated by removing the tumor using endoscopic surgery (colonoscopy). For stages I, II, and III cancer, more extensive surgery is needed to remove all or part of the colon and rectum that is cancerous. This surgery is called
colon resection
(colectomy).
CHEMOTHERAPY
Chemotherapy involves taking medicines that kill cancer cells. You may receive just one type of medicine or a combination of medicines.
Most people with stage III colon cancer receive chemotherapy after surgery for 3 to 6 months. This is called adjuvant chemotherapy. Even though the tumor was removed, chemotherapy is given to treat any cancer cells that may remain and to lower risk of recurrence of cancer.
Chemotherapy is also used to improve symptoms and prolong survival in people with stage IV colon cancer.
IMMUNOTHERAPY
Immunotherapy involves taking medicines that increase the ability of your own immune system to destroy cancer cells. Immunotherapy has different side effects than chemotherapy. It is effective in only a small subset of people with colorectal cancer.
RADIATION
Radiation therapy involves using radiation to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy is often used in the treatment of rectal cancer.
TARGETED THERAPY
Targeted treatment zeroes in on specific targets (molecules) in cancer cells. These targets play a role in how cancer cells grow and survive. Using these targets, the medicine disables the cancer cells so they cannot spread. Targeted therapy may be given as pills or may be injected into a vein.
You may have targeted therapy along with surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation treatment.
CANCER IN THE LIVER
For people with stage IV disease that has
spread to the liver
, treatment can be directed at the cancer tumors in the liver. This may include:
Burning the liver tumors (ablation)
Delivering chemotherapy or radiation directly into the liver
Freezing the liver tumors (cryotherapy)
Surgery
Radioactive beads/spheres that deliver treatment to kill the cancer cells
Alcohol (ethanol) injected into the liver tumors to kill cancer cells (rarely used)
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of the disease by joining a
colon cancer support group
. Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.
Outlook (Prognosis)
With treatment, stages 0, I, II, and III cancers often are cured, although higher stages of cancer are less likely to be cured. In most cases, stage IV cancer is not curable, but there are exceptions, including sometimes when the spread of the cancer is limited to the liver. In order for a person to be cured, treatment must get rid of all of the cancer. But there is a chance that the cancer will come back. If this occurs, curing the cancer is much less likely than before.
Cancer treatment can cause problems such as:
Bowel obstruction from surgical scarring.
Many sorts of short- and long-term side effects from chemotherapy, immunotherapy, radiation, and therapy targeted to the liver.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Blockage of the colon, causing
bowel obstruction
Cancer returning in the colon
Cancer spreading to other organs or tissues (
metastasis
)
Development of a second primary colorectal cancer
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have:
Black, tar-like stools
Blood during a bowel movement
Change in bowel habits
Unexplained weight loss
Prevention
Colon cancer can almost always be caught by colonoscopy in early stages, when it is most curable. All adults age 45 and older should have a colon cancer screening. How often you should have screening depends upon the test being used.
Colon cancer screening can often find polyps before they become cancerous. Removing these polyps may prevent colon cancer.
People with certain risk factors for colon cancer may need earlier testing (before age 45) or more frequent testing.
healthy lifestyle
also may help reduce your risk for colon cancer:
Get regular physical activity.
Don't smoke
or use tobacco.
Maintain a healthy weight.
Eat a diet rich in fruits and vegetables and low in red and processed meats.
Alternative Names
Colorectal cancer; Cancer - colon; Rectal cancer; Cancer - rectum; Adenocarcinoma - colon; Colon - adenocarcinoma; Colon carcinoma; Colon cancer
Patient Instructions
Abdominal radiation - discharge
Bland diet
Changing your ostomy pouch
Chemotherapy - what to ask your doctor
Ileostomy and your child
Ileostomy and your diet
Ileostomy - caring for your stoma
Ileostomy - changing your pouch
Ileostomy - discharge
Ileostomy - what to ask your doctor
Large bowel resection - discharge
Living with your ileostomy
Pelvic radiation - discharge
Radiation therapy - questions to ask your doctor
Small bowel resection - discharge
Total colectomy or proctocolectomy - discharge
Types of ileostomy
Images
Barium enema
Colonoscopy
Digestive system
Rectal cancer - x-ray
Sigmoid colon cancer - x-ray
Spleen and liver metastases - CT scan
Structure of the colon
Stages of cancer
Colon culture
Colon cancer - series
Colostomy  - series
Large bowel resection  - series
Large intestine (colon)
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Reducing risk for colorectal cancer.
www.cdc.gov/colorectal-cancer/prevention/
. Updated February 26, 2025. Accessed May 14, 2025.
Garber JJ, Chung DC. Colonic polyps and polyposis syndromes. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 126.
Lawler M, Johnston B, Van Schaeybroeck S, et al. Colorectal cancer. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 74.
National Cancer Institute website. Colorectal Cancer Prevention (PDQ) - Health Professional Version.
www.cancer.gov/types/colorectal/hp/colorectal-prevention-pdq
. Updated April 11, 2025. Accessed May 14, 2025.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network website. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology (NCCN guidelines): colorectal cancer screening. Version 2.2025 - June 24, 2025.
www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/colorectal_screening.pdf
. Updated June 24, 2025. Accessed August 27, 2025.
Patel SG, May FP, Anderson JC, et al. Updates on age to start and stop colorectal cancer screening: recommendations from the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal Cancer.
Am J Gastroenterol
. 2022;117(1):57-69. PMID: 34962727
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34962727/
.
US Preventive Services Task Force website. Final recommendation statement. Colorectal cancer: screening.
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/colorectal-cancer-screening
. Published May 18, 2021. Accessed May 14, 2025.
Review Date 4/1/2025
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Colorectal Cancer