Methanol poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Methanol poisoning
Methanol poisoning
Methanol is a nondrinking type of alcohol used for industrial and automotive purposes. This article discusses poisoning from an overdose of methanol.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Methyl alcohol
Where Found
Methanol is found in:
Antifreeze
Canned heating sources
Copy machine fluids
De-icing fluid
Fuel additives (octane boosters)
Paint remover or thinner
Shellac
Varnish
Windshield wiper fluid
Note: This list may not be all-inclusive.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Airway and lungs:
Breathing difficulty
No breathing
Eyes:
Blindness, complete or partial, sometimes described as "snow blindness"
Blurred vision
Dilation (widening) of the pupils
Heart and blood:
Low blood pressure
Nervous system:
Agitated behavior
Unresponsiveness (
coma
)
Confusion
Difficulty walking
Dizziness
Headache
Seizures
Skin and nails:
Bluish-colored lips and fingernails (cyanosis)
Stomach and intestines:
Abdominal pain (severe)
Diarrhea
Liver problems, including yellow skin (
jaundice
) and bleeding
Nausea
Pancreatitis (nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain)
Vomiting, sometimes bloody
Other:
Fatigue
Leg cramps
Weakness
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional.
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
If you go to the emergency room, take the container with you, if possible.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator)
Blood and urine tests including a blood methanol level
Chest x-ray
CT scan
ECG (
electrocardiogram
, or heart tracing)
Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms, including antidotes to reverse the effect of the poison (fomepizole or ethanol)
Tube through the nose to remove remaining poison, if the person is seen within 60 minutes after swallowing it
Because rapid removal of methanol is a key to treatment success and survival, the person will likely need dialysis (kidney machine).
Outlook (Prognosis)
Methanol is extremely poisonous. As little as 2 tablespoons (30 milliliters) can be deadly to a child. About 2 to 8 ounces (60 to 240 milliliters) can be deadly for an adult. Blindness is common and often permanent despite medical care. Intake of methanol affects multiple organs. Organ damage may be permanent. How well the person does depends on how much poison is swallowed and how soon treatment is received.
Alternative Names
Wood alcohol poisoning
References
Bluth MH, Pincus MR, Abraham NZ. Toxicology and therapeutic drug monitoring. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.
24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 24.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Nelson ME. Toxic alcohols. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 136.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.