Glanzmann thrombasthenia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Glanzmann thrombasthenia
Glanzmann thrombasthenia
Glanzmann thrombasthenia is a rare disorder of blood platelets. Platelets are particles in the blood that aid in blood clotting.
Causes
Glanzmann thrombasthenia is caused by the lack of a protein that is normally on the surface of platelets. This substance is needed for platelets to clump together to plug up bleeding spots and begin forming a clot.
The condition is congenital, which means it is present from birth. There are several genetic abnormalities that can cause the condition.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Heavy bleeding during and after surgery
Bleeding gums
Bruising easily or pinpoint red spots on the skin
Heavy menstrual bleeding
Nosebleeds that do not stop easily
Prolonged bleeding with minor injuries
Exams and Tests
The following tests may be used to diagnose this condition:
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Platelet aggregation test
Platelet function analysis (PFA)
Prothrombin time
(PT) and
partial thromboplastin time
(PTT)
Other tests may be needed. Family members may also need to be tested.
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for this disorder. Platelet transfusions may be given to people who are having severe bleeding.
Support Groups
More information and support for people with Glanzmann thrombasthenia and their families can be found at:
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center (GARD) --
rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/2478/glanzmann-thrombasthenia
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) --
rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/glanzmann-thrombasthenia/
Outlook (Prognosis)
Glanzmann thrombasthenia is a lifelong condition, and there is no cure. You should take special steps to try to avoid bleeding if you have this condition.
Anyone with a bleeding disorder should avoid taking aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen and naproxen. These medicines can prolong bleeding times by preventing platelets from clumping.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Severe bleeding
Iron deficiency anemia
in menstruating women due to abnormally heavy bleeding
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if:
You have bleeding or bruising of an unknown cause
Bleeding does not stop after usual treatments
Prevention
Glanzmann thrombasthenia is an inherited condition. There is no known prevention.
Alternative Names
Glanzmann's disease; Thrombasthenia - Glanzmann
References
Paola JD, O'Donnell. Von Willebrand disease and hemorrhagic abnormalities of platelet and vascular function. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 159.
Samji N, Chan A, Bhatt MD. Bleeding and clotting disorders in pediatrics. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 148.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Platelet Disorders