Elephant ear poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Elephant ear poisoning
Elephant ear poisoning
Elephant ear plants are indoor or outdoor plants with very large, arrow-shaped leaves. Poisoning may occur if you eat parts of this plant.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
The harmful substances in elephant ear plants are:
Oxalic acid
Asparagine, an amino acid found in this plant
Note: Leaves and stems are the most dangerous when eaten in large amounts.
Where Found
Elephant ear grows naturally in tropical and subtropical areas. It is also common in northern climates.
Symptoms
Symptoms of elephant ear poisoning are:
Blisters in the mouth
Burning in mouth and throat
Increased saliva production
Pain when swallowing
Hoarse voice
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
Redness, pain, and burning of the eyes
Swelling of the tongue, mouth, and eyes
Blistering and swelling in the mouth may be severe enough to prevent normal speaking and swallowing.
Home Care
Wipe out the mouth with a cold, wet cloth. Wash off any plant sap on the skin. Rinse out the eyes.
Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Part of plant swallowed, if known
Time swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the plant with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs,
including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive fluids through a vein (IV) and breathing support. Corneal damage will require additional treatment, possibly from an eye specialist.
Outlook (Prognosis)
If contact with the person's mouth is not severe, symptoms usually resolve within a few days. For people who do have severe contact with the plant, a longer recovery time may be necessary.
In rare cases, oxalic acid causes swelling severe enough to block the airways.
Do not touch or eat any plant that you are not familiar with. Wash your hands thoroughly after working in the garden or walking in the woods.
References
Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 65.
Ryan ET, Hill DR, Solomon T, Aronson NE, Endy TP. Poisonous plants and aquatic animals. In: Ryan ET, Hill DR, Solomon T, Aronson NE, Endy TP, eds.
Hunter's Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 139.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning