Portacaval shunting: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Portacaval shunting
Portacaval shunting
Portacaval shunting is a surgical treatment to create new connections between two blood vessels in your abdomen. It is used to treat people who have severe liver problems.
Description
Portacaval shunting is major surgery. It involves a large cut (incision) in the belly area (abdomen). The surgeon then makes a connection between the portal vein (which supplies most of the liver's blood) and the inferior vena cava (the vein that drains blood from most of the lower part of the body.)
The new connection diverts blood flow away from the liver. This reduces blood pressure in the portal vein and decreases the risk for a tear (rupture) and bleeding from the veins in the esophagus and stomach.
Why the Procedure is Performed
Normally, blood coming from your esophagus, stomach, and intestines first flows through the liver. When your liver is very damaged and the blood vessels are narrowed by the scarring, blood cannot flow through it easily. This is called portal hypertension (increased pressure and backup of the portal vein.) The veins can then break open (rupture), causing serious bleeding. Most cases of portal hypertension happen in patients with cirrhosis (end-stage scarring in the liver).
Common causes of portal hypertension are:
Alcohol use
causing scarring of the liver (
cirrhosis
)
Blood clots
in a vein that flows from the liver to the heart
Too much iron in the liver (
hemochromatosis
)
Hepatitis B
or
hepatitis C
Metabolic-associated steatohepatitis (MASH): a metabolic condition associated with conditions like diabetes, insulin resistance, high blood pressure, obesity, hyperlipidemia, where the liver becomes inflamed and scarred
When portal hypertension occurs, you may have:
Bleeding from veins of the stomach, esophagus, or intestines (
variceal bleeding
)
Buildup of fluid in the belly (
ascites
)
Buildup of fluid in the chest (hydrothorax)
Hepatic encephalopathy
(which causes symptoms such as confusion, slow reflexes, poor memory and concentration)
Portacaval shunting diverts part of your blood flow from the liver. This improves blood flow in your stomach, esophagus, and intestines.
Portacaval shunting is most often done when
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting
(TIPS) has not worked. TIPS is a much simpler and less invasive procedure.
Risks
Risks for anesthesia and surgery in general are:
Allergy to medicines, problems breathing
Bleeding, blood clots, or infection
Risks for this surgery include:
Liver failure
Hepatic encephalopathy (a disorder that affects concentration, mental status, and memory -- may lead to coma)
Other complications such as stress to the heart, lung, kidneys, and other organs can occur after major surgery such as this, in people with portal hypertension and cirrhosis (scarred liver)
After the Procedure
People with liver disease are at a much higher risk for complications after surgery.
People with severe liver disease that is getting worse may need to be considered for liver transplant.
Alternative Names
Shunt - portacaval; Liver failure - portacaval shunt; Cirrhosis - portacaval shunt
Images
Hepatic venous circulation
References
Dudeja V, Ferrantella A, Fong Y. The liver. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery
. 21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 54.
Rosemurgy AS, Sucandy I. Techniques of portosystemic shunting: selective and nonselective shunts. In: Jarnagin WR, Allen PJ, Chapman WC, et al, eds.
Blumgart's Surgery of the Liver, Biliary Tract, and Pancreas
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 84.
Shah VH, Kamath PS. Portal hypertension and variceal bleeding. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 92.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Gastroenterologist, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cirrhosis
Liver Diseases