Hand lotion poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hand lotion poisoning
Hand lotion poisoning
Hand lotion poisoning occurs when someone swallows hand lotion or hand cream.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
These ingredients in hand lotion or cream can be harmful if swallowed:
Dimethicone
Mineral oil
Paraffins (waxes)
Petrolatum
Various alcohols
Where Found
Various hand lotions and creams contain these ingredients.
Symptoms
Symptoms of hand lotion poisoning include:
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
Possible
blockage in the intestines
that causes
stomach pain
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. Give the person water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include:
Vomiting
Convulsions
A decreased level of alertness
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning.  They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen
Chest x-ray
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Laxatives
Medicine to treat the effects of the poison
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on how much hand lotion they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
These products are not very poisonous, and recovery is very likely.
Alternative Names
Hand cream poisoning
References
Meehan TJ.  Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Theobald JL, Kostic MA. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 77.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cosmetics