Spleen removal: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Spleen removal
Spleen removal
Spleen removal is surgery to remove a diseased or damaged spleen. This surgery is called splenectomy.
The spleen is in the upper part of the belly, on the left side underneath the ribcage. The spleen helps the body fight germs and infections. It also helps filter the blood.
Description
The spleen is removed while you are under
general anesthesia
(asleep and pain-free). Your surgeon may do either an open splenectomy, a laparoscopic splenectomy, or a robotic splenectomy.
During open spleen removal:
Your surgeon makes a cut (incision) in the middle of the belly or on the left side of the belly just below the ribs.
The spleen is located and removed.
If you are also being treated for
cancer
, lymph nodes in the belly are examined. They may also be removed.
The incision is closed using stitches or staples.
During laparoscopic or robotic spleen removal:
Your surgeon makes 3 or 4 small cuts in the belly.
Your surgeon inserts an instrument called a laparoscope through one of the cuts. The scope has a tiny camera and light on the end, which allows the surgeon to see inside the belly. Other instruments are inserted through the other cuts.
A harmless gas is pumped into the belly to expand it. This makes it easier for your surgeon to work.
Your surgeon uses the scope and other instruments to remove the spleen.
The scope and other instruments are removed. The incisions are closed using stitches or staples.
With laparoscopic or robotic surgery, recovery is often faster and less painful than with open surgery. Talk to your surgeon about which type of surgery is right for you or your child.
Why the Procedure is Performed
Conditions that may require spleen removal include:
Abscess
or cyst in the spleen.
Blood clot
(thrombosis) in the blood vessels of the spleen.
Cirrhosis of the liver
.
Diseases or disorders of blood cells, such as
idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura
(ITP),
hereditary spherocytosis
, thalassemia,
hemolytic anemia
, and
hereditary elliptocytosis
. These are all rare conditions.
Hypersplenism
(overactive spleen).
Cancer of the lymph system such as
Hodgkin disease
.
Some types of leukemia.
Other tumors or cancers that affect the spleen.
Sickle cell anemia
.
Splenic artery aneurysm (rare).
Trauma to the spleen.
Risks
Risks of having anesthesia and surgery in general are:
Reactions to medicines
Breathing problems
Bleeding, blood clots, infection
Risks associated with this surgery include:
Blood clot in the portal vein (an important vein that carries blood to the liver)
Collapsed lung
Hernia
at the surgical cut site
Increased risk for infection after splenectomy (children are at higher risk than adults for infection)
Injury to nearby organs, such as the pancreas, stomach, and colon
Pus collection under the diaphragm
Risks are about the same for both open, robotic and laparoscopic spleen removal.
Before the Procedure
You or your child will have many visits with your health care providers and several tests before surgery. You may have:
A complete physical exam
Immunizations, such as the pneumococcal, meningococcal,
Haemophilus influenzae
, flu, and COVID-19 vaccines
Blood tests, special imaging tests, and other tests to make sure you are healthy enough to have surgery
Transfusions to receive extra red blood cells and platelets, if you need them
Tell the surgeon or nurse if:
You are, or could be pregnant.
You are taking any medicines, including medicines, drugs, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription.
You have been drinking a lot of alcohol, more than 1 or 2 drinks a day.
Planning for your surgery:
If you have
diabetes
,
heart disease
, or other medical conditions, your surgeon may ask you to see the provider who treats you for these conditions.
If you smoke, it's important to cut back or quit. Smoking can
slow healing
and increase the risk for
blood clots
. Ask your provider for help
quitting smoking
.
If needed,
prepare your home
to make it easier to recover after surgery.
Ask your surgeon if you need to arrange to have someone drive you home after your surgery
During the week before your or your child's surgery:
You or your child may be asked to temporarily stop taking medicines that keep your blood from clotting. These medicines are called blood thinners. This includes over-the-counter medicines and supplements such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and vitamin E. Many prescription medicines are also blood thinners.).
Ask your surgeon which medicines you or your child should still take on the day of surgery.
Let your surgeon know about any illness you may have before your surgery. This includes
COVID-19
,
cold
,
flu
,
fever
, herpes breakout, or other illness. If you do get sick, your surgery may need to be postponed
On the day of surgery:
Follow instructions
about when you or your child should stop eating or drinking.
Take the medicines the surgeon told you or your child to take with a small sip of water.
Arrive at the hospital on time.
After the Procedure
You or your child will spend less than a week in the hospital. The hospital stay may be only 1 or 2 days after a laparoscopic splenectomy. Healing will likely take 4 to 6 weeks.
After going home, follow instructions on
taking care of yourself
or
your child
.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome of this surgery depends on what disease or injuries you or your child has. People who do not have other severe injuries or medical problems often recover after this surgery.
After the spleen is removed, a person is more likely to develop infections. Talk with your provider about getting needed vaccinations, particularly the flu and COVID-19 vaccines. Children may need to take antibiotics to prevent infections. Most adults do not need antibiotics long-term.
Alternative Names
Splenectomy; Laparoscopic splenectomy; Spleen removal - laparoscopic
Patient Instructions
Laparoscopic spleen removal in adults - discharge
Open spleen removal in adults - discharge
Spleen removal - child - discharge
Surgical wound care - open
When you have nausea and vomiting
Images
Red blood cells, target cells
Spleen removal - series
References
Cameron J. Spleen. In: Cameron J, ed.
Current Surgical Therapy
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:651-662.
Nassar AK, Hawn M. The spleen. In: Townsend CM, Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 57.
Remiker AS, Brandow AM. Hyposplenism, splenic trauma, and splenectomy. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 536.
Review Date 1/21/2025
Updated by: Jonas DeMuro, MD, Diplomate of the American Board of Surgery with added Qualifications in Surgical Critical Care, Assistant Professor of Surgery, Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Spleen Diseases