Geographic tongue: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Geographic tongue
Geographic tongue
Geographic tongue is characterized by irregular patches on the surface of the tongue. This gives it a map-like appearance.
Causes
The exact cause of geographic tongue is unknown. It may be due to irritation from hot or spicy foods, or alcohol. The condition appears to be less common in smokers.
The change in pattern on the surface of the tongue occurs when there is a loss of the tiny, finger-like projections, called papillae, on the tongue. These areas look flat as a result. The appearance of the tongue may change very quickly. The flat-looking areas may remain for more than a month.
Symptoms
Symptoms include:
Map-like appearance to the surface of the tongue
Patches that move from day to day
Smooth, red patches and sores (lesions) on the tongue
Soreness and burning pain (in some cases)
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will diagnose this condition by looking at your tongue. Most of the time, tests are not needed.
Treatment
No treatment is needed. Antihistamine gel or steroid- or tacrolimus-containing mouth rinses may help ease discomfort.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Geographic tongue is a harmless condition. It may be uncomfortable and last for a long time.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if the symptoms last longer than 10 days. Seek medical help right away if:
You have breathing problems.
Your tongue is severely swollen.
You have problems speaking, chewing, or swallowing.
Prevention
Avoid irritating your tongue with hot or spicy food or alcohol if you are prone to this condition.
Alternative Names
Patches on the tongue; Tongue - patchy; Benign migratory glossitis; Glossitis - benign migratory
Images
Tongue
References
James WD. Disorders of the mucous membranes. In: James WD, ed.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2026:chap 29.
Jordan RC. Diseases of the mouth and salivary glands. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 393.
Pham KL, Mirowski GW. Oral diseases and oral manifestations of gastrointestinal and liver disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 24.
Review Date 1/29/2025
Updated by: Ashutosh Kacker, MD, FACS,  Professor of Clinical Otolaryngology, Weill Cornell Medical College, and Attending Otolaryngologist, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Tongue Disorders