CSF smear: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
CSF smear
CSF smear
A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) smear is a lab test to look for bacteria, fungi, and viruses in the fluid that moves in the space around the spinal cord and brain. CSF protects the brain and spinal cord from injury.
How the Test is Performed
A sample of CSF is needed. This is usually done with a lumbar puncture (also called a
spinal tap
).
The sample is sent to a lab. There, a tiny amount is spread on a glass slide. Lab staff then views the sample under a microscope. The smear shows the color of the fluid and the number and shape of cells present in the fluid. Other tests may be done to check for the presence of bacteria or fungi in the sample.
How to Prepare for the Test
Follow instructions on how to prepare for a spinal tap.
Why the Test is Performed
Your health care provider may order this test if you have signs of an infection that affects the brain or nervous system. The test helps identify what is causing the infection. This will help your provider decide on the best treatment.
Normal Results
A normal test result means there are no signs of an infection. This is also called a negative result. However, a normal result doesn't mean that there is no infection. The spinal tap and CSF smear may need to be done again or other tests may be needed.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Bacteria or other germs found in the sample may be a sign of
meningitis
. This is an infection of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. The infection can be caused by bacteria, fungi, or viruses.
Risks
A laboratory smear poses no risk. Your provider will tell you about the risks of a spinal tap.
Alternative Names
Spinal fluid smear; Cerebrospinal fluid smear
Images
CSF smear
Gram stain
References
Hasbun R, Tunkel AR. Approach to the patient with central nervous system infection. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 86.
Karcher DS, McPherson RA. Cerebrospinal, synovial, serous body fluids, and alternative specimens. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 30.
O'Connell TX. Cerebrospinal fluid evaluation. In: O'Connell TX, ed.
Instant Work-Ups: A Clinical Guide to Medicine
. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 9.
Review Date 8/29/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Meningitis