Tendon repair: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Tendon repair
Tendon repair
Tendon repair is surgery to repair damaged or torn tendons.
Description
Tendon repairs can often be done in an outpatient setting. Hospital stays, if any, are short.
Tendon repair can be performed using:
Local anesthesia (immediate area of the surgery is pain-free)
Regional anesthesia (local and surrounding areas are pain-free)
General anesthesia
(asleep and pain-free)
The surgeon makes a cut on the skin over the injured tendon. The damaged or torn ends of the tendon are sewn together.
If the tendon has been severely injured, a tendon graft may be needed.
In this case, a piece of tendon from another part of the body or an artificial tendon is used.
If needed, tendons are reattached to the surrounding tissue.
Your surgeon examines the area to see if there are any injuries to nerves and blood vessels.
When the repair is complete, the wound is closed and bandaged.
If the tendon damage is too severe, the repair and reconstruction may have to be done at different times. Your surgeon will perform one surgery to repair part of the injury. Another surgery will be done at a later time to finish repairing or reconstructing the tendon.
Why the Procedure is Performed
The goal of tendon repair is to bring back normal function of joints or surrounding tissues following a tendon injury or tear.
Risks
Risks of anesthesia and surgery in general include:
Breathing problems
Reactions to medicines
Bleeding, blood clots, infection
Risks of this procedure include:
Scar tissue that prevents smooth movements
Pain that does not go away
Partial loss of function in the involved joint
Stiffness of the joint
The tendon tears again
Before the Procedure
Tell your surgeon or nurse if:
You are or could be pregnant
You are taking any medicines, including medicines, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription
During the week before your surgery:
You may be asked to temporarily stop taking medicines that keep your blood from clotting. These medicines are called blood thinners. This includes over-the-counter medicines and supplements such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and vitamin E. Many prescription medicines are also blood thinners.
Ask your surgeon which medicines you should still take on the day of surgery.
On the day of the surgery:
Follow instructions about not drinking or eating anything before the procedure.
Take the medicines you were told to take with a small sip of water.
Arrive at the hospital on time.
After the Procedure
Healing may take 6 to 12 weeks. During that time:
The injured part may need to be kept in a splint or cast. Later, a brace that allows movement may be used.
You'll be taught exercises to help the tendon heal and limit scar tissue.
It is important to give the tendon time to recover. Closely following the instructions from your healthcare provider will help ensure a positive outcome.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most tendon repairs are successful with proper and  continued physical therapy.
Alternative Names
Repair of tendon
Images
Tendons and muscles
References
Cannon DL. Flexor and extensor tendon injuries. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, eds.
Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics.
14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 66.
Irwin TA. Tendon injuries of the foot and ankle. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.
DeLee, Drez & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine.
5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 118.
Review Date 8/27/2024
Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Sprains and Strains