Bone pain or tenderness: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Bone pain or tenderness
Bone pain or tenderness
Bone pain or tenderness is aching or other discomfort in one or more bones.
Considerations
Bone pain is less common than
joint pain
and
muscle pain
. The source of bone pain may be clear, such as from a
fracture
following an accident. Other causes, such as cancer that spreads (
metastasizes
) to the bone, may be less obvious.
Causes
Bone pain can occur with injuries or conditions such as:
Cancer in the bones (primary malignancy)
Cancer that has spread to the bones (metastatic malignancy)
Disruption of blood supply (as in
sickle cell anemia
)
Infected bone (
osteomyelitis
)
Injury (trauma)
Leukemia
Loss of mineralization (
osteoporosis
)
Overuse
Toddler fracture (a type of stress fracture that occurs in toddlers)
Home Care
See your health care provider
if you have bone pain and do not know why it is occurring.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Take any bone pain or tenderness very seriously. Contact your provider if you have any unexplained bone pain.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will ask you about your medical history and do a physical exam.
Some questions that may be asked include:
Where is the pain located?
How long have you had pain and when did it start?
Is the pain getting worse?
Do you have any other symptoms?
You may have the following tests:
Blood tests (such as
CBC
,
blood differential
)
Bone x-rays
, including a bone scan
CT
or
MRI
scan
Hormone level
tests
Pituitary and adrenal gland function tests
Urine tests
Depending on the cause of the pain, your provider may prescribe:
Antibiotics
Anti-inflammatory medicines
Hormones
Laxatives (if you develop constipation during prolonged bed rest)
Pain relievers
If pain is related to thinning bones, you may need treatment for osteoporosis.
Alternative Names
Aches and pains in bones; Pain - bones
Images
Skeleton
References
Jones RL. Malignant tumors of bone, sarcomas, and other soft tissue neoplasms. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 187.
Kim C, Kaar SG. Commonly encountered fractures in sports medicine. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR. eds.
DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 10.
Weber TJ. Osteoporosis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 225.
Whyte MP, Dahir KM. Osteonecrosis, osteosclerosis/hyperostosis, and other disorders of bone. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 229.
Review Date 4/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bone Diseases
Bone Infections