Gastritis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Gastritis
Gastritis
Gastritis occurs when the lining of the stomach becomes inflamed or swollen.
Gastritis may last for only a short time (acute gastritis) or it may linger for months to years (chronic gastritis).
Causes
The most common causes of gastritis are:
Certain medicines, such as aspirin, ibuprofen, or naproxen and other similar medicines
Heavy alcohol drinking
Infection of the stomach with a bacteria called
Helicobacter pylori
Less common causes are:
Autoimmune disorders
(such as
pernicious anemia
)
Backflow of bile into the stomach (bile reflux)
Cocaine use
Eating or drinking caustic or corrosive substances (such as poisons)
Viral infection, such as cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus (more often occurs in people with a weak immune system)
Trauma or a severe, sudden illness such as major surgery, kidney failure, or being placed on a breathing machine may cause gastritis.
Symptoms
Many people with gastritis do not have any symptoms.
Symptoms you may notice are:
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Pain in the upper part of the belly or abdomen
If gastritis is causing bleeding from the lining of the stomach, symptoms may include:
Black stools
Vomiting blood
or coffee-ground-like material
Exams and Tests
Tests that may be needed are:
Complete blood count
(CBC) to check for
anemia
or low blood count
Examination of the stomach with an endoscope (
esophagogastroduodenoscopy
or EGD) with biopsy of stomach lining
H pylori
tests (breath test or stool test)
Stool test to check for small amounts of blood in the stools, which may be a sign of bleeding in the stomach
Treatment
Treatment depends on what is causing the problem. Some of the causes will go away over time.
You may need to stop taking aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen, or other medicines that may be causing gastritis. Always talk to your health care provider before stopping any medicine.
You may use other over-the-counter and prescription drugs that decrease the amount of acid in the stomach, such as:
Antacids
H2 antagonists: famotidine (Pepcid), cimetidine (Tagamet), and nizatidine (Axid)
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs): omeprazole (Prilosec), esomeprazole (Nexium), Iansoprazole (Prevacid), rabeprazole (AcipHex), and pantoprazole (Protonix)
Newer acid blockers called potassium-competitive acid blockers (PCABs) (such as vonoprazan)
Antibiotics may be used to treat gastritis caused by infection with
Helicobacter pylori
bacteria. They are taken with an acid blocker such as a PPI or PCAB.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the cause, but is often very good.
Possible Complications
Blood loss and increased risk for gastric cancer can occur.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you develop:
Pain in the upper part of the belly or abdomen that does not go away
Black or tarry stools
Vomiting blood or coffee-ground-like material
Prevention
Avoid long-term use of substances that can irritate your stomach such as aspirin, anti-inflammatory drugs, or alcohol.
Patient Instructions
Taking antacids
Images
Digestive system
Stomach and stomach lining
References
Feldman M, Jensen PJ, Howden CW. Gastritis and gastropathy. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease.
11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 52.
Kuipers EJ. Acid peptic disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 125.
Review Date 1/24/2025
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Gastroenterologist, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Foodborne Illness
Stomach Disorders