Magnesium blood test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Magnesium blood test
Magnesium blood test
A serum magnesium test measures the level of magnesium in the blood.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is needed.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel slight pain. Others feel a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is done when your health care provider suspects you have an abnormal level of magnesium in your blood.
Only a small amount of the body's total amount of magnesium is found in the blood. About one half of the body's magnesium is found in bone. The other half is found inside cells of body tissues and organs.
Magnesium is needed for many chemical processes in the body. It helps maintain normal muscle and nerve function and helps keep bones strong. Magnesium is also needed for the heart to function normally and to help regulate blood pressure. Magnesium also helps the body regulate blood sugar levels and helps support the body's defense (immune) system.
Normal Results
The normal range for blood magnesium level is 1.7 to 2.2 mg/dL (0.70 to 0.91 mmol/L).
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
A high blood magnesium level may be due to:
Adrenal insufficiency (the glands are not producing enough hormones)
Diabetic ketoacidosis
, a life-threatening problem in people with diabetes
Lithium use
Loss of kidney function (
acute
or
chronic renal failure
)
Loss of body fluids (
dehydration
)
Milk alkali syndrome
(a condition in which there is a high level of calcium in the body)
A low blood magnesium level may be due to:
Alcohol use disorder
Diabetes that is uncontrolled
Diarrhea
that is chronic
Too much production of the hormone aldosterone by the adrenal gland (hyperaldosteronism)
Hyperaldosteronism (adrenal gland produces too much of the hormone aldosterone)
High blood calcium level (
hypercalcemia
)
Kidney disease
Medicines, such as proton pump inhibitors for acid reflux, diuretics (water pills), aminoglycoside antibiotics, amphotericin, cisplatin, calcineurin inhibitors
Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis)
High blood pressure and protein in the urine in a pregnant woman (
preeclampsia
)
Inflammation of the lining of the large intestine and rectum (
ulcerative colitis
)
Risks
There is little risk in having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Alternative Names
Magnesium - blood
Images
Blood test
References
Klemm KM, Klein MJ, Zhang Y. Biochemical markers of bone metabolism. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 16.
Yu ASL. Disorders of magnesium and phosphorus. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 105.
Review Date 2/13/2025
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Fluid and Electrolyte Balance