Facial paralysis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Facial paralysis
Facial paralysis
Facial paralysis means that a person is no longer able to move some or all of the muscles on one or both sides of the face.
Causes
Facial paralysis is almost always caused by:
Damage or swelling of the facial nerve, which carries signals from the brain to the muscles of the face
Damage to the area of the brain that sends signals to the muscles of the face
Weakness of the facial muscles that can occur in neurologic diseases such as
myasthenia gravis
or some myopathies and
muscular dystrophies
In people who are otherwise healthy, facial paralysis is often due to
Bell palsy
. This is a condition in which the facial nerve becomes inflamed.
Stroke
may cause facial paralysis that comes on rapidly. With a stroke, other muscles on one side of the body may also be involved.
Facial paralysis that is due to a brain tumor usually develops slowly. Symptoms can include headaches,
seizures
, or hearing loss.
In newborns, facial paralysis may be caused by trauma during birth.
Other causes include:
Infection of the brain or surrounding tissues (such as HIV)
Lyme disease
Sarcoidosis
Tumor that presses on the facial nerve
Side effects of medicines, such as botulinum toxin
Home Care
Follow your health care provider's instructions on how to take care of yourself at home. Take any medicines as directed.
If the eye cannot fully close, the cornea must be protected from drying out with prescription eye drops or gel. An eye patch is sometimes required to protect the eye.
Physical and speech therapy can help preserve or restore function.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have weakness or numbness in your face. Seek emergency medical help right away if you have these symptoms along with a severe headache, seizure, or
blindness
.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions about your medical history and symptoms, including:
Are both sides of your face affected?
Have you recently been sick or injured?
What other symptoms do you have? For example, drooling, excessive tears from one eye, headaches, facial pain, seizures,
vision problems
,
weakness
, or
paralysis
.
Tests that may be ordered include:
Blood tests, including blood sugar,
CBC,
(ESR), Lyme test
CT scan of the head
Electromyography
(EMG)
MRI of the head
Treatment depends on the cause. Follow your provider's treatment recommendations.
Your provider may refer you to a physical, speech, or occupational therapist. If facial paralysis from Bell palsy lasts for more than 6 to 12 months, surgery may be recommended to help the eye close and improve the appearance of the face.
Alternative Names
Paralysis of the face
Images
Facial drooping
References
Edje L. Acute facial paralysis. In: Kellerman RD, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds.
Conn's Current Therapy 2025
. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:763-766.
Mattox DE, Vivas EX. Clinical disorders of the facial nerve. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 172.
Rucker JC, Seay MD. Cranial neuropathies. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 103.
Smith AG, Shy ME. Peripheral neuropathies. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 388.
Review Date 2/11/2025
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Facial Injuries and Disorders