Tularemia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Tularemia
Tularemia
Tularemia is a bacterial infection in wild rodents. The bacteria are passed to humans through contact with tissue from the infected animal. The bacteria can also be passed by
ticks
, biting flies, and mosquitoes.
Causes
Tularemia is caused by the bacterium
Francisella tularensis.
Humans can get the disease through:
A bite from an infected tick, horsefly, or mosquito
Breathing in infected dirt or plant material
Direct contact, through a break in the skin, with an infected animal or its dead body (most often a rabbit, muskrat, beaver, or squirrel)
Eating infected meat (rare)
The disorder most commonly occurs in North America and parts of Europe and Asia. In the United States, this disease is found more often in Missouri, South Dakota, Oklahoma, and Arkansas. Although outbreaks can occur in the United States, they are rare.
Some people may develop
pneumonia
after breathing infected dirt or plant material. This infection has been known to occur on Martha's Vineyard (Massachusetts), where bacteria are present in rabbits, raccoons, and skunks.
Symptoms
Symptoms develop 3 to 5 days after exposure. The illness usually starts suddenly. It may continue for several weeks after symptoms begin.
Symptoms include:
Fever, chills, sweating
Eye irritation (called
conjunctivitis
, if the infection began in the eye)
Headache
Joint stiffness, muscle pain
Red spot on the skin, growing to become a sore (ulcer)
Shortness of breath
Weight loss
Exams and Tests
Tests for the condition include:
Blood culture
for the bacteria
Blood test measuring the body's immune response (antibodies) to the infection (
serology for tularemia
)
Chest x-ray
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test of a sample from an ulcer
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to cure the infection with antibiotics.
The antibiotics streptomycin and tetracycline are commonly used to treat this infection. Another antibiotic, gentamicin, has been tried as an alternative to streptomycin. Gentamicin seems to be very effective, but it has been studied in only a small number of people because this is a rare disease. The antibiotics tetracycline and chloramphenicol can be used alone but are not usually a first choice.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Tularemia is fatal in about 10% of untreated cases, and in less than 1% of treated cases.
Possible Complications
Tularemia may lead to these complications:
Bone infection (
osteomyelitis
)
Infection of the sac around the heart (
pericarditis
)
Infection of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord (
meningitis
)
Pneumonia
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if symptoms develop after a rodent bite, tick bite, or exposure to the flesh of a wild animal.
Prevention
Preventive measures include wearing gloves when skinning or dressing wild animals and staying away from sick or dead animals.
Alternative Names
Deerfly fever; Rabbit fever; Pahvant Valley plague; Ohara disease; Yato-byo (Japan); Lemming fever
Images
Deer ticks
Ticks
Tick imbedded in the skin
Antibodies
Bacteria
References
Auwaerter PG, Penn RL. Francisella tularensis (tularemia). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 227.
Bloch KC, Lopez FA. Tularemia and other Francisella infections. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 287.
Review Date 2/5/2025
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Animal Diseases and Your Health
Bacterial Infections
Tick Bites