Joint swelling: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Joint swelling
Joint swelling
Joint swelling is the buildup of fluid in the soft tissue surrounding the joint or the joint itself.
Considerations
Joint swelling may occur along with
joint pain
. The swelling may cause the joint to appear larger or abnormally shaped.
Joint swelling can cause pain or stiffness. After an injury, swelling of the joint may mean you have a broken bone or a tear in the muscle tendon or ligament.
Many different types of arthritis may cause swelling, redness, or warmth around the joint.
An infection in the joint can cause swelling, pain, and fever.
Causes
Joint swelling may be caused by different conditions, including:
Chronic type of arthritis called
ankylosing spondylitis
Painful type of arthritis caused by buildup of uric acid crystals in a joint (
gout
)
Arthritis caused by wear and tear of joints (
osteoarthritis
)
Arthritis caused by buildup of calcium-type crystals in joints (
pseudogout
)
Disorder that involves arthritis and a skin condition called psoriasis (
psoriatic arthritis
)
Group of conditions that involve the joints, eyes, and urinary and genital systems (
reactive arthritis
)
Inflammation of joints, nearby tissues, and sometimes other organs (
rheumatoid arthritis
)
Inflammation of a joint due to an infection (
septic arthritis
)
Disorder in which the body's immune system attacks healthy tissue (
systemic lupus erythematosus
)
Home Care
For joint swelling after an injury, apply ice packs to reduce pain and swelling. Wrap the ice in a cloth. Do not place ice directly on the skin. Raise the swollen joint so that it is higher than your heart, if possible. For example, if your ankle is swollen, lie down with pillows comfortably placed under your foot so that your ankle and leg are slightly raised.
If you have arthritis, follow your health care provider's treatment plan.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider right away if you have joint pain and swelling with a fever.
Also contact your provider if you have:
Unexplained joint swelling
Joint swelling after an injury
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will examine you. The joint will be closely examined. You will be asked about your joint swelling, such as when it began, how long it has lasted, and whether you have it all the time or only at certain times. You may also be asked what you have tried at home to relieve the swelling.
Tests to diagnose the cause of joint swelling may include:
Blood tests
Joint x-rays
Joint aspiration and examination of joint fluid
Physical therapy for muscle and joint rehabilitation may be recommended.
Alternative Names
Swelling of a joint
Images
The structure of a joint
References
West SG, Bridges SL. Systemic diseases in which arthritis is a feature. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 254.
Woolf AD. History and physical examination. In: Hochberg MC, Gravallese EM, Smolen JS, van der Heijde D, Weinblatt ME, Weisman MH, eds.
Rheumatology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 29.
Van Vollenhoven RF. Evaluation of monoarticular and polyarticular arthritis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, Koretzky GA, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds.
Firestein & Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 45.
Review Date 7/23/2024
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Joint Disorders