Electrolytes: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Electrolytes
Electrolytes
Electrolytes are minerals in your blood and other body fluids that carry an electric charge.
Electrolytes affect how your body functions in many ways, including:
The amount of water in your body
The acidity of your blood (pH)
Your nerve and muscle function
Other important processes
You lose electrolytes when you sweat. You must replace them by drinking fluids that contain electrolytes. Water does not contain electrolytes.
Common electrolytes include:
Calcium
Chloride
Magnesium
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Electrolytes can be acids, bases, or salts. They can be measured by different blood tests. Each electrolyte can be measured separately, such as:
Ionized calcium
Serum calcium
Serum chloride
Serum magnesium
Serum phosphorus
Serum potassium
Serum sodium
Note: Serum is the part of blood that doesn't contain cells.
Sodium, potassium, chloride, and calcium levels can also be measured as part of a
basic metabolic panel
. A more complete test, called comprehensive metabolic panel, can test for these and several more chemicals.
The
electrolytes - urine test
measures electrolytes in urine. It tests the levels of calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium, and other electrolytes.
References
Hamm LL, DuBose TD. Disorders of acid-base balance. In: Yu ASL, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Taal MW, eds.
Brenner and Rector's The Kidney
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 16.
Oh MS, Briefel G, Pincus MR. Evaluation of renal function, water, electrolytes, and acid-base balance. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 15.
Review Date 11/19/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Fluid and Electrolyte Balance