Low nasal bridge: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Low nasal bridge
Low nasal bridge
A low nasal bridge is the flattening of the top part of the nose.
Considerations
Genetic diseases or infections may cause decreased growth of the bridge of nose.
A decrease in the height of the bridge of nose is best seen from a side view of the face.
Causes
Causes may include:
Cleidocranial dysostosis
Congenital syphilis
Down syndrome
Normal variation
Other syndromes that are present at birth (congenital)
Williams syndrome
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have questions about the shape of your child's nose.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
The provider will do a physical exam. The provider may ask questions about your child's family and medical history.
Laboratory studies may include:
Chromosome studies
Enzyme
assays (blood tests to measure specific enzyme levels)
Metabolic studies
X-rays
Alternative Names
Saddle nose
Images
The face
Low nasal bridge
References
Farrior EH. Special rhinoplasty techniques. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 32.
Haddad J, Dodhia SN. Congenital disorders of the nose. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 404.
Madan-Khetarpal S, Arnold G, Ortiz D. Genetic disorders and dysmorphic conditions. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, Garrison J, eds.
Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 1.
Slavotinek AM. Dysmorphology. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 128.
Review Date 2/17/2024
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Nose Injuries and Disorders