Pulse: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pulse
Pulse
The pulse is the number of heartbeats per minute.
How the Test is Performed
The pulse can be measured at areas where an artery passes close to the skin. These areas include the:
Back of the knees
Groin
Neck
Temple
Top or inner side of the foot
Wrist
To measure the pulse at your wrist, place your index and middle finger over the underside of your opposite wrist, below the base of the thumb. Press with flat fingers until you feel the pulse.
To measure the pulse on the neck, place the index and middle fingers just to the side of the Adam's apple, in the soft, hollow area. Press gently until you locate the pulse.
Note: Sit or lie down before taking the neck pulse. The neck arteries in some people are sensitive to pressure. Fainting or slowing of the heartbeat can result. Also, do not take the pulses on both sides of the neck at the same time. Doing so can slow the flow of blood to the head and lead to fainting.
Once you find the pulse, count the beats for 1 full minute. Or, count the beats for 30 seconds and multiply by 2. This will give the beats per minute. It is usually accurate to count the beats for shorter times such as 10 or 15 seconds and then multiply by 6 or 4 respectively. It is usually accurate to count the beats for shorter times, such as 10 or 15 seconds, and then multiply by 6 or 4 respectively.
How to Prepare for the Test
To determine the resting heart rate, you must have been resting for at least 10 minutes. Take the exercise heart rate while you are exercising.
How the Test will Feel
There is a slight pressure from the fingers.
Why the Test is Performed
Measuring the pulse gives important information about your health. Any change from your normal heart rate can indicate a health problem. A fast pulse may signal an infection or
dehydration
. In emergency situations, the pulse rate can help determine if the person's heart is pumping.
Pulse measurement has other uses as well. During or immediately after exercise, the pulse rate gives information about your fitness level and health.
Normal Results
For resting heart rate:
Newborns 0 to 1 month old: 70 to 190 beats per minute
Infants 1 to 11 months old: 80 to 160 beats per minute
Children 1 to 2 years old: 80 to 130 beats per minute
Children 3 to 4 years old: 80 to 120 beats per minute
Children 5 to 6 years old: 75 to 115 beats per minute
Children 7 to 9 years old: 70 to 110 beats per minute
Children 10 years and older, and adults (including seniors): 60 to 100 beats per minute
Well-trained athletes: 40 to 60 beats per minute
What Abnormal Results Mean
Resting heart rates that are continually high (
tachycardia
) may mean a problem. Talk to your health care provider about this. Also discuss resting heart rates that are below the normal values (
bradycardia
).
A pulse that is very firm (
bounding pulse
) and that lasts for more than a few minutes should be checked by your provider as well. An
irregular pulse
can also indicate a problem.
A pulse that is hard to locate may mean
blockages in the artery
. These blockages are common in people with diabetes or
hardening of the artery from high cholesterol
. Your provider may order a test known as a
Doppler study
to check the blockages.
Alternative Names
Heart rate; Heart beat
Images
Taking your carotid pulse
Neck pulse
How to take your pulse
Radial pulse
References
Bernstein D. History and physical examination in cardiac evaluation. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 471.
Schriger DL. Approach to the patient with abnormal vital signs. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 7.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Arrhythmia
Cardiac Rehabilitation
Heart Diseases
Vital Signs