Polymyalgia rheumatica: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Polymyalgia rheumatica
Polymyalgia rheumatica
Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) is an inflammatory disorder. It involves pain and stiffness in the shoulders and often the hips.
Causes
Polymyalgia rheumatica most often occurs in people over 50 years old. The cause is unknown.
PMR may occur before or with
giant cell arteritis
(GCA; also called temporal arteritis). This is a condition in which blood vessels that supply blood to the head and eye (and rarely other sites) become inflamed.
PMR can sometimes be hard to tell apart from
rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) in an older person. This uncertainty occurs when tests for rheumatoid factor and anti-CCP antibody are negative.
Symptoms
The most common symptom is pain and stiffness in both shoulder regions and the neck. The pain and stiffness are worse in the morning. This pain most often progresses to the hip regions.
Fatigue is also present. People with this condition find it increasingly hard to get out of bed and to move around.
Other symptoms include:
Appetite loss, which leads to
weight loss
Depression
Fever
Exams and Tests
Lab tests alone can't diagnose PMR. Most people with this condition have high markers of inflammation, such as the sedimentation rate (
ESR
) and
C-reactive protein
(CRP).
Other test results for this condition include:
Abnormal levels of proteins in the blood
Abnormal level of white blood cells
Anemia
(low red blood cell count)
These tests may also be used to monitor your condition.
However, imaging tests such as x-rays of the shoulder or hips are not often helpful. These tests may reveal joint damage that is not related to recent symptoms. In difficult cases, ultrasound or MRI of the shoulder may be done. These imaging tests often show bursitis or low levels of joint inflammation.
Treatment
Without treatment, PMR does not get better. However, low doses of corticosteroids (such as prednisone, 10 to 20 mg per day) can markedly ease symptoms, often within a day or two.
The dose should then be slowly reduced to a very low level.
Treatment needs to continue for 1 to 2 years. In some people, even longer treatment with low doses of prednisone is needed.
Corticosteroids can cause many side effects such as weight gain, development of
diabetes
or
osteoporosis
. You need to be watched closely if you are taking these medicines. If you are at risk for osteoporosis, your health care provider may recommend you take medicines to prevent this condition.
Outlook (Prognosis)
For most people, PMR goes away with treatment after 1 to 2 years. You might be able to stop taking medicines after this point, but check with your provider first.
For some people, symptoms return after they reduce or stop taking corticosteroids. In these cases, another medicine such as Sarilumab can be used. Sarilumab is an injectable medication that blocks IL-6. IL-6 is a cytokine that is involved in inflammation.
Giant cell arteritis may also be present or can develop later. If this is the case, the temporal artery would need to be evaluated and different treatment given.
More severe symptoms can make it harder for you to work or take care of yourself at home.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have weakness or stiffness in your shoulder and neck that does not go away. Also contact your provider if you have new symptoms such as fever, headache, and pain with chewing or loss of vision. These symptoms may be from giant cell arteritis.
Prevention
There is no known prevention.
Alternative Names
PMR
References
American College of Rheumatology website. Polymyalgia rheumatica.
rheumatology.org/patients/polymyalgia-rheumatica
. Updated February 2025. Accessed March 24, 2025.
Dejaco C, Singh YP, Perel P, et al. 2015 recommendations for the management of polymyalgia rheumatica: a European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology collaborative initiative.
Arthritis Rheumatol
. 2015;67(10):2569-2580. PMID: 2635874
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26352874/
.
Miller JB, Hellmann DB. Giant cell arteritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, and Takayasu's arteritis. In: Firestein GS, Mclnnes IB, Koretzky GA, Mikuls TR, Neogi T, O'Dell JR, eds.
Firestein & Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 89.
Spiera R. Giant cell arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 250.
Review Date 1/28/2025
Updated by: Diane M. Horowitz, MD, Rheumatology and Internal Medicine, Northwell Health, Great Neck, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Polymyalgia Rheumatica