Spinal tumor: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Spinal tumor
Spinal tumor
A spinal tumor is a growth of cells (mass) in or around the spinal cord.
Causes
Any type of tumor may occur in the spine, including primary and secondary tumors.
Primary tumors: most of these tumors are benign and slow growing.
Astrocytoma: a tumor of the supporting cells inside the spinal cord
Meningioma: tumor of the tissue that covers the spinal cord
Schwannoma: a tumor of the cells surrounding the nerve fibers
Ependymoma: a tumor of the cells that line the cavities of the brain
Lipoma: a tumor of the fat cells
Secondary tumors or metastasis: these tumors are cancer cells coming from other areas of the body.
Prostate
,
lung
,
breast
,
thyroid
, and
kidney
cancer tend to spread to the bones including the spine
Leukemia
: a blood cancer that starts in the white cells in the bone marrow
Lymphoma
: a cancer of the lymph tissue
Myeloma
: a blood cancer that starts in the plasma cells of the bone marrow
The cause of primary spinal tumors is unknown. Some primary spinal tumors occur with certain inherited gene mutations.
Spinal tumors can be located:
Inside the spinal cord (intramedullary)
In the membranes (meninges) covering the spinal cord (extramedullary - intradural)
Between the meninges and bones of the spine (extradural)
In the spine bones (vertebrae)
As it grows, the tumor can affect the:
Blood vessels
Bones of the spine
Meninges
Nerve roots
Spinal cord cells
The tumor may press on the spinal cord or nerve roots, causing damage. With time, the damage may become permanent.
Symptoms
The symptoms depend on the location, type of tumor, and your general health. Secondary tumors that have spread to the spine from another site (metastatic tumors) often progress quickly. Primary tumors often progress slowly over weeks to years.
Symptoms may include:
Abnormal sensations
or loss of sensation, especially in the legs
Back pain that gets worse over time, is often in the middle or lower back, is usually severe and not relieved by pain medicine, gets worse when lying down or straining (such as during a cough or sneeze), and may extend to the hips or legs
Loss of bowel control
,
bladder leakage
Muscle contractions,
twitches
, or spasms
Muscle weakness
(decreased muscle strength) in the legs that causes falls, makes walking difficult, and may get worse (progressive) and lead to paralysis
Exams and Tests
A nervous system (neurological) exam may help pinpoint the location of the tumor. Your health care provider may also find the following during an exam:
Abnormal reflexes
Increased muscle tone
Loss of pain and temperature sensation
Muscle weakness
Tenderness in the spine
These tests may confirm spinal tumor:
Spine CT
Spine
MRI
Spine x-ray
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination
Myelogram (x-ray of the spinal canal that contains the spinal cord)
PET scan
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to reduce or prevent nerve damage caused by pressure on (compression of) the spinal cord and ensure that you can walk.
Treatment should be given quickly. The more quickly symptoms develop, the sooner treatment is needed to prevent permanent injury. Any new or unexplained back pain in a person with cancer should be promptly and thoroughly investigated.
Treatments may include:
Corticosteroids (dexamethasone) may be given to reduce inflammation and swelling around the spinal cord.
Emergency surgery may be needed to relieve compression on the spinal cord. Some tumors can be completely removed. In other cases, part of the tumor may be removed to relieve pressure on the spinal cord.
Radiation therapy
may be used with, or instead of, surgery.
Chemotherapy
has not been proven effective against most primary spinal tumors, but it may be recommended in some cases, depending on the type of tumor.
Physical therapy may be needed to improve muscle strength and the ability to function independently.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome varies depending on the tumor. Early diagnosis and treatment usually leads to a better outcome.
Nerve damage often continues, even after surgery. Although some amount of permanent disability is likely, early treatment may delay major disability and death.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have a history of cancer and develop severe back pain that is sudden or gets worse.
Go to the emergency room or call 911 or the local emergency number if you develop new symptoms, or your symptoms get worse during the treatment of a spinal tumor.
Alternative Names
Tumor - spinal cord
Images
Vertebrae
Spinal tumor
References
Fatima N, Massaad E, Shankar GM, Shin JH. Spinal tumors. In: Steinmetz MP, Berven SH, Benzel EC, eds.
Benzel's Spine Surgery
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 70.
Jakubovic R, Ruschin M, Tseng CL, Pejovic-Milic A, Sahgal A, Yang VXD. Surgical resection with radiation treatment planning of spinal tumors.
Neurosurgery
. 2019;84(6):1242-1250. PMID: 29796646
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29796646/
.
Mellinghoff IK, DeAngelis LM. Tumors of the central nervous system. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 175.
Niglas M, Tseng C-L, Dea N, Chang E, Lo S, Sahgal A. Spinal cord compression. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 54.
Soliman H, Fridely J, Oyelese A, Gokaslan ZL. Management of spinal metastatic tumors. In: Ellenbogen RG, Sekhar LN, Kitchen ND, da Silva Hb, eds.
Principles of Neurological Surgery
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 32.
Review Date 7/29/2024
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Spinal Cord Diseases
Spine Injuries and Disorders