Total protein: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Total protein
Total protein
The total protein test measures the total amount of two classes of proteins found in the fluid portion of your blood. These are albumin and globulin.
Proteins are important parts of all cells and tissues.
Albumin helps prevent fluid from leaking out of blood vessels. It also carries chemicals in your blood.
Globulins are an important part of your immune system.
How the Test is Performed
A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is
drawn from a vein
located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.
How to Prepare for the Test
Many medicines can interfere with blood test results.
Your health care provider will tell you if you need to stop taking any medicines before you have this test.
DO NOT stop or change your medicines without talking to your provider first.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is often done to diagnose nutritional problems, kidney disease or
liver disease
.
If total protein is abnormal, you will need to have more tests to look for the exact cause of the problem.
Normal Results
The normal range is 6.0 to 8.3 grams per deciliter (g/dL) or 60 to 83 g/L.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
The examples above show the common measurements for results for these tests. Some laboratories use different measurements or may test different specimens.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Higher-than-normal levels may be due to:
Chronic
inflammation or infection, including HIV and hepatitis B or C
Multiple myeloma
Waldenstrom disease
Lower-than-normal levels may be due to:
Agammaglobulinemia
Bleeding (hemorrhage)
Burns
(extensive)
Glomerulonephritis
Liver disease
Malabsorption
Malnutrition
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-losing enteropathy
Considerations
Total protein measurement may be increased during pregnancy.
Images
Blood test
References
Landry DW, Bazari H. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 106.
Manary MJ, Trehan I. Protein-energy malnutrition. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 203.
Pincus MR, Abraham NZ, Bluth M. Interpreting laboratory results. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA:: Elsevier; 2022:chap 9.
Review Date 6/20/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Kidney Tests
Liver Diseases