Codeine overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Codeine overdose
Codeine overdose
Codeine is a drug in some prescription pain medicines. It is in the class of medicines known as opioids, which refers to any synthetic, semisynthetic, or natural drug that has morphine-like properties.
Codeine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Codeine can be poisonous in large amounts.
Where Found
Codeine is found in these medicines:
Acetaminophen and codeine phosphate
Fioricet with codeine
Promethazine with codeine cough syrup
Robitussin A-C
Triacin-C
Tuzistra XR
Tylenol with codeine #3
Other medicines may also contain codeine.
Symptoms
Symptoms of a codeine overdose include:
Bluish fingernails and lips
(cyanosis)
Breathing problems, such as slow and labored breathing, shallow breathing, no breathing
Cold, clammy skin
Confusion
Constipation
Drowsiness, fatigue, weakness
Flushing of the skin
Itching
Lightheadedness, dizziness
Loss of consciousness,
coma
Low blood pressure, weak pulse
Muscle twitches
Nausea and vomiting
Tiny pupils
Spasms of the stomach and intestines
Some of these symptoms may occur even when a person takes the correct amount of codeine.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
When it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
Your health care provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain for neurologic symptoms
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Medicine to reverse the depressive effects of the painkiller (naloxone) and treat other symptoms
Activated charcoal (if a reversal agent is not given)
Laxative
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Outlook (Prognosis)
Codeine is usually combined with other medicines, such as acetaminophen. Because of this, the harmful effects of these other medicines must also be treated.
Shock
, severe pneumonia, brain damage, and death are possible.
Alternative Names
Methylmorphine overdose
References
Aronson JK. Opioid receptor agonists. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:348-380.
Nikolaides JK, Thompson TM. Opioids. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 151.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Opioid Overdose
Opioids and Opioid Use Disorder (OUD)