Diastasis recti: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Diastasis recti
Diastasis recti
Diastasis recti is a separation between the left and right side of the rectus abdominis muscle. This muscle covers the front surface of the belly area.
Causes
Diastasis recti is common in newborns. It is seen most often in premature and African American infants.
Pregnant women may develop the condition because of increased tension on the abdominal wall. The risk is higher with multiple births or many pregnancies.
Symptoms
A diastasis recti looks like a ridge, which runs down the middle of the belly area. It stretches from the bottom of the breastbone to the belly button. It increases with muscle straining.
In infants, the condition is most easily seen when the baby tries to sit up. When the infant is relaxed, you can often feel the edges of the rectus muscles.
Diastasis recti is commonly seen in women who have multiple pregnancies. This is because the muscles have been stretched many times. Extra skin and soft tissue in the front of the abdominal wall may be the only signs of this condition in early pregnancy. In the later part of pregnancy, the top of the pregnant uterus can be seen bulging out of the abdominal wall. An outline of parts of the unborn baby may be seen in some severe cases.
Exams and Tests
The health care provider can diagnose this condition with a physical exam.
Treatment
No treatment is needed for pregnant women with this condition.
In infants, diastasis recti will disappear over time. Surgery may be needed if the baby develops a
hernia
that becomes trapped in the space between the muscles.
Outlook (Prognosis)
In some cases, diastasis recti heals on its own.
Pregnancy-related diastasis recti often lasts long after the woman gives birth. Exercise may help improve the condition. Umbilical hernia may occur in some cases. Surgery is rarely performed for diastasis recti.
Possible Complications
In general, complications only result when a hernia develops.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider right away if a child with diastasis recti:
Develops redness or pain in the abdomen
Has vomiting that does not stop
Cries all the time
Images
Diastasis recti
References
Chabra S, Anderson JE, Javid PJ. Abdominal wall defects. In: Gleason CA, Sawyer T, eds.
Avery's Diseases of the Newborn
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 62.
Privratsky AM, Barreto JC, Turnage RH. Abdominal wall, umbilicus, peritoneum, mesenteries, omentum, and retroperitoneum. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery.
21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 44.
Review Date 9/9/2023
Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, General Surgery Practice Specializing in Breast Cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Common Infant and Newborn Problems
Health Problems in Pregnancy