Fine motor control: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Fine motor control
Fine motor control
Fine motor control is the coordination of muscles, bones, and nerves to produce small, exact movements. An example of fine motor control is picking up a small item with the index finger (pointer finger or forefinger) and thumb.
The opposite of fine motor control is gross (large, general) motor control. An example of
gross motor control
is waving an arm in greeting.
Problems of the brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves (nerves outside of the brain and spinal cord), muscles, or joints may all decrease fine motor control. People with Parkinson disease have trouble speaking, eating, and writing because they have lost fine motor control.
The amount of fine motor control in children is used to help figure out the child's developmental age. Children develop fine motor skills over time, by practicing and being taught. To have fine motor control, children need:
Awareness and planning
Coordination
Muscle strength
Normal sensation
The following tasks can only occur if the nervous system develops in the right way:
Cutting out shapes with scissors
Drawing lines or circles
Folding clothes
Holding and writing with a pencil
Stacking blocks
Zipping a zipper
References
Chaves-Gnecco D, Feldman HM. Developmental/behavioral pediatrics. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, Garrison J, eds.
Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 3.
Kelly DP, McCain DH. Neurodevelopmental and executive function and dysfunction. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 49.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.