Hydrofluoric acid poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hydrofluoric acid poisoning
Hydrofluoric acid poisoning
Hydrofluoric acid is a chemical that is a very strong acid. It is usually in liquid form. Hydrofluoric acid is a caustic chemical that is highly corrosive, which means it immediately causes severe damage to tissues, such as burning or ulcers, on contact. This article discusses poisoning from swallowing, breathing in, or touching hydrofluoric acid.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Hydrofluoric acid
Where Found
This acid is most commonly used for industrial purposes. It is used in:
Computer screen manufacturing
Fluorescent bulbs
Glass etching
High-octane gasoline manufacturing
Some household rust removers
Note: This list may not be all inclusive.
Symptoms
From swallowing:
Burns to the mouth and throat causing severe pain
Drooling
Breathing difficulty from throat and mouth swelling and burning
Abdominal pain
Vomiting blood
Chest pain
Collapse (from low blood pressure or
shock
)
Irregular heartbeat
From breathing in (inhaling) the acid:
Bluish lips and fingernails
(cyanosis)
Chills
Chest tightness
Choking
Coughing blood
Rapid pulse
Dizziness
Fever
Weakness
If the poison touched your skin or eyes, you may have:
Blisters
Burns
Pain
Vision loss
Hydrofluoric acid poisoning can have direct effects on the heart. It can lead to irregular, and sometimes life-threatening, heartbeats.
People who come into contact with this poison are likely to have a combination of the listed symptoms.
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional.
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
Immediately take the person to the hospital.
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
The
local poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
If you go to the emergency room, take the container for the poison with you, if possible.
Your health care provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Swallowing this acid can cause a severe drop in blood pressure. If you breathed in fumes from the acid, your provider may hear signs of fluid in the lungs when listening to your chest with a stethoscope.
Specific treatment depends on how the poisoning occurred. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate.
If the person swallowed the poison, treatment may include:
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator)
Blood and urine tests
Camera down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach (
endoscopy
)
Chest x-ray
CT scan
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Fluids through a vein (
intravenous
or IV)
Magnesium and calcium solutions to neutralize the acid
Medicines to treat symptoms
Note: Activated charcoal does not effectively treat poisoning by acids.
If the person touched the poison, treatment may include:
Magnesium and calcium solutions applied to the skin to neutralize the acid (solutions may also be given through an IV)
Monitoring to watch for signs of body-wide poisoning
Medicines to treat symptoms
Surgical removal of burned skin (debridement)
Transfer to a hospital that specializes in burn care
Washing of the skin (irrigation), possibly every few hours for several days
If the person breathed in the poison, treatment may include:
Airway support, as noted above
Breathing treatments that deliver calcium into the lungs
Chest x-ray
Camera down the throat to see burns in the airway (
bronchoscopy
)
ECG
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Hydrofluoric acid is especially dangerous. The most common accidents involving hydrofluoric acid cause severe burns on the skin and hands. The burns may be extremely painful. People will have a lot of scarring and some loss of function in the affected area.
The person may need to be admitted to a hospital to continue treatment. Swallowing this poison can have severe effects on many parts of the body. Extensive damage to the mouth, throat, and stomach are possible. Holes (perforations) in the esophagus and stomach may cause serious infections in the chest and abdominal cavities, which may result in death. Surgery may be needed to repair the perforations. Cancer of the esophagus is a high risk in people who survive after ingesting hydrofluoric acid.
Alternative Names
Fluorhydric acid
References
Hoyte C. Caustics. In: Walls RM, eds.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 143.
Kuschner WG, Blanc PD. Acute responses to toxic exposures. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 103.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.