Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) blood test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) blood test
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) blood test
The gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) blood test measures the level of the
enzyme
GGT in the blood.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
Your health care provider may tell you to stop taking medicines that can affect the test.
Medicines that can increase GGT level include:
Acetaminophen
Alcohol
Carbamazepine
Phenytoin
Phenobarbital
Medicines that can decrease GGT level include:
Birth control pills
Clofibrate
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
GGT is an enzyme found in high levels in the liver, kidney, pancreas, heart, and brain. It is also found in lesser amount in other tissues. An enzyme is a protein that causes a specific chemical change in the body.
This test is used to detect diseases of the liver or
bile
ducts. It is also done with other tests (such as the
ALT
,
AST
,
ALP
, and
bilirubin
tests) to tell the difference between liver or bile duct disorders and bone disease.
It may also be done to screen for, or monitor, alcohol use.
Normal Results
The normal range for adults is 5 to 40 units per liter (U/L) or 0.08 to 0.67 micro-kat/liter ( µkat/L).
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or may test different specimens. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
An increased GGT level may be due to any of the following:
Alcohol use
Diabetes
Flow of bile from the liver is blocked (
cholestasis
)
Heart failure
Lack of blood flow to the liver (liver ischemia)
Liver tissue death
Liver cancer or tumor
Lung disease
Pancreas disease
Scarring of the liver (
cirrhosis
)
Swollen and inflamed liver (
hepatitis
)
Use of medicines and drugs that are toxic to the liver, especially alcohol use
Risks
There is little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include:
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma
(blood collecting under the skin)
Excessive bleeding
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Alternative Names
Gamma-GT; GGTP; GGT; Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
References
Daniels L, Khalili M, Goldstein E, Bluth MH, Bowne WB, Pincus MR. Evaluation of liver function. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 22.
Pratt DS. Liver chemistry and function tests. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 73.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Frank D. Brodkey, MD, FCCM, Associate Professor, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bile Duct Diseases
Cirrhosis
Heart Failure
Hepatitis
Liver Cancer