Myristica oil poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Myristica oil poisoning
Myristica oil poisoning
Myristica oil is a clear liquid that smells like the spice nutmeg. Myristica oil poisoning occurs when someone swallows this substance.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Myristica oil (
Myristica fragrans
) can be harmful. It comes from the seed of a nutmeg.
Where Found
Myristica oil is found in:
Aromatherapy products
Mace
Nutmeg
Other products may also contain myristica oil.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of myristica oil poisoning in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Chest pain
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Double vision
Dry mouth
Eye irritation
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Abdominal pain
Dehydration
Nausea
HEART AND BLOOD
Rapid heartbeat
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Anxiety
Brief euphoria (feeling of being drunk)
Delirium
(agitation and confusion)
Drowsiness
Hallucinations
Headache
Lightheadedness
Seizures
(convulsions)
Tremors
(shaking of the arms or legs)
SKIN
Redness, flushing
Home Care
Get medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the product to the hospital with you, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done.
Treatment may include:
Fluids through the vein (by IV)
Medicine to treat symptoms
Activated charcoal
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach (
gastric lavage
)
Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (
ventilator
)
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on how much myristica oil was swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
Hallucinations, anxiety and other psychiatric symptoms, and visual problems are most common in severe overdoses. Deaths have been reported, but only very rarely.
Alternative Names
Nutmeg oil; Myristicin
References
Aronson JK. Myristicaceae. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:1156-1157.
Barrett W, Iwanicki JL. THC and hallucinogens. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 145.
Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 65.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.