Malignant mesothelioma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Malignant mesothelioma
Malignant mesothelioma
Malignant mesothelioma is an uncommon cancerous
tumor
. It mainly affects the lining of the lung and chest cavity (pleura) or lining of the abdomen (peritoneum). It is due to long-term asbestos exposure.
Causes
Long-term exposure to asbestos is the biggest risk factor. Asbestos is a fire-resistant material. It was once commonly found in insulation, ceiling and roofing vinyls, cement, and car brakes. Even though many asbestos workers smoked, experts do not believe smoking itself is a cause of this condition.
Older veterans make up 30% of the cases of mesothelioma due to exposure in the military ship, vehicle, and plane industry.
Men are affected more often than women. The average age at diagnosis is 60 years. Most people seem to develop the condition about 30 years after being in contact with the asbestos.
Symptoms
Symptoms may not appear until 20 to 40 years or longer after exposure to asbestos, and may include:
Abdominal bloating
Abdominal pain
Chest pain
, especially when taking a deep breath
Cough
Fatigue
Shortness of breath
Weight loss
Fever and sweating
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will do an exam and ask you the person about your symptoms and medical history. Tests that may be done include:
Chest x-ray
Chest CT scan
Cytology of pleural fluid
Open lung biopsy
Pleural biopsy
Mesothelioma is often hard to diagnose. Under the microscope, it can be hard to tell this disease apart from similar conditions and tumors.
Treatment
Malignant mesothelioma is a difficult cancer to treat.
There is usually no cure, unless the disease is found very early and the tumor can be completely removed with surgery. Most of the time, when the disease is diagnosed, it is too advanced for surgery.
Chemotherapy
or radiation may be used to reduce symptoms. Combining certain chemotherapy medicines may help decrease symptoms, but it will not cure the cancer.
Untreated, most people survive about 9 months.
Participating in a clinical trial (test of new treatments), may give the person more treatment options.
Pain relief, oxygen, and other supportive treatments may also help relieve symptoms.
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a
support group
where members share common experiences and problems.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The survival time varies greatly from several months to several years. The outlook depends on:
The location of the mesothelioma
The cell type of the mesothelioma
The stage of the tumor
The person's age and general health
Whether surgery is an option
The person's response to treatment
You and your family may want to start thinking about end-of-life planning, such as:
Palliative care
Hospice care
Advance care directives
Health care agents
Possible Complications
Complications of malignant mesothelioma may include:
Side effects of chemotherapy or radiation
Continued spread of cancer to other organs
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Make an appointment with your provider if you have symptoms of malignant mesothelioma.
Prevention
Avoid exposure to asbestos.
Alternative Names
Mesothelioma - malignant; Malignant pleura mesothelioma (MPM)
Images
Respiratory system
References
Baas P, Hassan R, Nowak AK, Rice D. Malignant mesothelioma. In: Pass HI, Ball D, Scagliotti GV, eds.
IASLC Thoracic Oncology
. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 53.
Davies HE, Sterman D, Gary Lee YC. Pleural malignancy. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 114.
McCool FD. Diseases of the diaphragm, chest wall, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 86.
National Cancer Institute website. Malignant mesothelioma treatment (adult) (PDQ) -- Health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/mesothelioma/hp/mesothelioma-treatment-pdq
. Updated April 24, 2024. Accessed July 8, 2024.
Review Date 6/17/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Mesothelioma