Camphor overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Camphor overdose
Camphor overdose
Camphor is a white substance with a strong odor that is commonly used in topical ointments and gels used for cough suppression and muscle aches. Camphor overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
These ingredients can be harmful:
Camphor
Menthol
Where Found
Camphor is found in:
Nasal decongestants
Camphorated oil
Some moth repellents
Topical pain relievers
Vicks VapoRub
Note: This list may not be all inclusive.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Abdominal pain
Anxiety,  agitation, excitation,
hallucinations
Burning of the mouth or the throat
Tremors, twitching facial muscles,
seizures
Excessive thirst
Muscle spasms, rigid muscles
Nausea and vomiting
Rapid pulse
Skin irritation
Slow breathing
Sleepiness
Unconsciousness
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional.
Any camphor-containing medicine that is on the skin should be removed using soap and lukewarm water.
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (as well as the ingredients and strength if known)
When it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
If you go to the emergency room, take the container with you, if possible.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms (such as seizures) will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal (used if other substances were taken along with the camphor, since activated charcoal does not adsorb camphor very well)
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine)
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
ECG (
electrocardiogram
, or heart tracing)
Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV)
Laxative
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Alternative Names
Vicks VapoRub overdose
References
Aronson JK. Camphor. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs.
16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:44.
Aronson JK. Lauraceae. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:484-486.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.