Liver biopsy: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Liver biopsy
Liver biopsy
A liver
biopsy
is a test that takes a sample of tissue from the liver for examination.
How the Test is Performed
Most of the time, the test is done in the hospital or specialized procedure unit. Before the test is done, you may be given a medicine to prevent pain or to calm you (sedative).
The biopsy may be done through the abdominal wall:
You will lie on your back with your right hand under your head. You need to stay as still as you can.
The health care provider will find the correct spot for the biopsy needle to be inserted into the liver. This is often done by using ultrasound.
The skin is cleaned, and numbing medicine is injected into the area using a small needle.
A small cut is made, and the biopsy needle is inserted.
You will be told to hold your breath while the biopsy is taken. This is to reduce the chance of damage to the lung or liver.
The needle is removed quickly.
Pressure will be applied to stop the bleeding. A bandage is placed over the insertion site.
The procedure can also be done by inserting a needle into your liver by moving it through the jugular vein.
If the procedure is performed this way, you will lie on your back.
X-rays
will be used to guide the provider to the vein.
A special needle and catheter (thin tube) is used to take the biopsy sample.
A liver biopsy can also be done during certain surgeries or during an internal ultrasound called an endoscopic ultrasound (EUS).
If you receive sedation for this test, you will need someone to drive you home. You should not drive, operate machinery, or make important or legal decisions for 24 hours after sedation.
How to Prepare for the Test
Tell your provider about:
Bleeding problems
Medicine allergies
Medicines you are taking including herbs, supplements, medicines, or drugs you bought without a prescription
Whether you are pregnant
You must sign a consent form. Blood tests are sometimes done to test your blood's ability to clot. You will be told not to eat or drink anything for the 8 hours before the test.
For infants and children:
The preparation needed for a child depends on the child's age and maturity. Your child's provider will tell you what you can do to prepare your child for this test.
How the Test will Feel
You will feel a stinging pain when the anesthetic is injected. The biopsy needle may feel like deep pressure and dull pain. Some people feel this pain in the shoulder.
Why the Test is Performed
The biopsy helps diagnose many
liver diseases
. The procedure also helps assess the stage (early, advanced) of liver disease. Liver biopsies are now done less often because noninvasive tests may be enough to assess for liver damage. However, some situations and diseases still require a liver biopsy for more information.
The biopsy also helps detect:
Cancer
Infections
The cause of abnormal levels of liver enzymes that have been found in blood tests
The cause of an unexplained liver enlargement
Normal Results
The liver tissue is normal.
What Abnormal Results Mean
The biopsy may reveal a number of liver diseases, including
cirrhosis
,
hepatitis
, or infections such as
tuberculosis
. It may also indicate cancer.
This test also may be performed for:
Alcoholic liver disease
(fatty liver, hepatitis, or cirrhosis)
Amebic liver abscess
Autoimmune hepatitis
Biliary atresia
Chronic active hepatitis
Chronic persistent hepatitis
Disseminated coccidioidomycosis
Hemochromatosis
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis D
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hodgkin lymphoma
Metabolic associated steatohepatitis (MASH)
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Pyogenic liver abscess
Reye syndrome
Sclerosing cholangitis
Primary biliary cholangitis
Wilson disease
Risks
Risks may include:
Collapsed lung
Complications from the sedation
Injury to the gallbladder or kidney or bowel
Internal bleeding
Alternative Names
Biopsy - liver; Percutaneous liver biopsy; Needle biopsy of liver
Images
Liver biopsy
References
Cratchley AL, Rotimi O, Haughk B. Liver, biliary system and pancreas. In: Cross SS, ed.
Underwood's Pathology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 16.
Martin P. Approach to the patient with liver disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 132.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Jenifer K. Lehrer, MD, Gastroenterologist, Philadelphia, PA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Biopsy
Cirrhosis
Hepatitis
Hepatitis C
Liver Cancer
Liver Diseases