Urinalysis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Urinalysis
Urinalysis
Urinalysis is the physical, chemical, and microscopic examination of urine. It involves a number of tests to detect and measure various compounds that pass through the urine.
How the Test is Performed
A urine sample is needed. Your health care provider will tell you what type of urine sample is needed. Two common methods of collecting urine are a
24-hour urine collection
and a
clean catch urine specimen
.
The sample is sent to a lab, where it is examined for the following:
PHYSICAL COLOR AND APPEARANCE
How the urine sample looks to the naked eye:
Is it clear or cloudy?
Is it pale, or dark yellow, or another color?
MICROSCOPIC APPEARANCE
The urine sample is examined under a microscope to:
Check if there are any cells, urine crystals,
urinary casts
, mucus, and other substances.
Identify any bacteria or other germs.
CHEMICAL TESTS (
urine chemistry
)
A special strip (dipstick) is used to test for substances in the urine sample. The strip has pads of chemicals that change color when they come in contact with substances of interest.
Examples of specific urinalysis tests that may be done to check for problems include:
Red blood cell urine test
Glucose urine test
Protein urine test
Urine pH level test
Ketones urine test
Bilirubin urine test
Urine specific gravity test
How to Prepare for the Test
Certain medicines change the color of urine, but this is not a sign of disease. Your provider may tell you to stop taking any medicines that can affect test results.
Medicines that can change your urine color include:
Chloroquine
Iron supplements
Levodopa
Nitrofurantoin
Phenazopyridine
Phenothiazine
Phenytoin
Riboflavin
Triamterene
How the Test will Feel
The test involves only normal urination, and there is no discomfort.
Why the Test is Performed
A urinalysis may be done:
As part of a routine medical exam to screen for early signs of disease
If you have signs of
diabetes
or
kidney disease
, or to monitor you if you are being treated for these conditions
To check for
blood in the urine
To diagnose a
urinary tract infection
Normal Results
Normal urine varies in color from almost colorless to dark yellow. Some foods, such as beets and blackberries, may turn urine red.
Usually, glucose, ketones, protein, and bilirubin are not detectable in urine. The following are not normally found in urine:
Hemoglobin
Nitrites
Red blood cells
White blood cells
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may mean you have an illness, such as:
Kidney disease
Urinary tract infection
Kidney stones
Poorly controlled diabetes
Bladder
or
kidney cancer
Your provider can discuss the results with you.
Risks
There are no risks with this test.
Considerations
If a home test is used, the person reading the results must be able to tell the difference between colors, because the results are interpreted using a color chart.
Alternative Names
Urine appearance and color; Routine urine test; Cystitis - urinalysis; Bladder infection - urinalysis; UTI - urinalysis; Urinary tract infection - urinalysis; Hematuria - urinalysis
Images
Female urinary tract
Male urinary tract
References
Navarro D, Fonseca NM, Garigali G, Fogazzi GB. Urinalysis. In: Johnson RJ, Floege J, Tonelli M, eds.
Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 4.
Riley RS, McPherson RA. Basic examination of urine. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 29.
Sobel JD, Brown P. Urinary tract infections. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 72.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Urinalysis
Urine and Urination