Eucalyptus oil overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Eucalyptus oil overdose
Eucalyptus oil overdose
Eucalyptus oil overdose occurs when someone swallows a large amount of a product that contains this oil. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an
overdose
, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Eucalyptus oil can be harmful in large amounts.
Where Found
Eucalyptus oil is an ingredient in many over-the-counter products, including some:
Medicated rubs and liniments
Diaper rash creams
Inhalers to relieve
nasal congestion
Medicine for sore gums, mouth, and throat
Mouthwashes
Other products may also contain eucalyptus oil.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of a eucalyptus oil overdose in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Rapid breathing
Shallow breathing
Wheezing
EYES, EARS, NOSE, THROAT, AND MOUTH
Difficulty swallowing
Burning sensation in mouth
Tiny pupils
HEART AND BLOOD
Rapid, weak heartbeat
Low blood pressure
MUSCLES AND JOINTS
Muscle weakness
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Drowsiness
Headache
Unconsciousness
Dizziness
Seizures
(convulsions)
Slurred speech
SKIN
Redness and swelling (from the oil touching the skin)
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Abdominal pain
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
If the oil is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may done include:
Blood and urine tests
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Activated charcoal
Laxative
Tube through the nose into the stomach to wash out the stomach (
gastric lavage
)
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a breathing machine (
ventilator
)
Outlook (Prognosis)
Survival past 48 hours is usually a good sign that recovery will occur. If any damage to the kidneys has occurred, it may take several months to heal. Drowsiness may persist for several days.
References
Aronson JK. Myrtaceae. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:1159-1160.
Lim CS, Aks SE. Plants, herbal medications, and mushrooms. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 153.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.