Pericarditis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pericarditis
Pericarditis
Pericarditis is a condition in which the sac-like covering around the heart (pericardium) becomes inflamed.
Causes
The cause of pericarditis is unknown or unproven in many cases. It mostly affects men ages 20 to 50 years.
Pericarditis is often the result of an infection such as:
Viral infections that cause a chest cold or pneumonia
Infections with bacteria (less common)
Some fungal infections (rare)
The condition may be seen with diseases such as:
Cancer
(including
leukemia
)
Disorders in which the immune system attacks healthy body tissue by mistake
(autoimmune diseases)
HIV infection and AIDS
Underactive thyroid gland
Kidney failure
Rheumatic fever
Tuberculosis
(TB)
Other causes include:
Heart attack
Heart surgery or trauma to the chest, esophagus, or heart
Certain medicines, such as procainamide, hydralazine, phenytoin, isoniazid, and some drugs used to treat cancer or suppress the immune system
Swelling or inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis)
Radiation therapy to the chest
Symptoms
Chest pain
is almost always present. The pain:
May be felt in the neck, shoulder, back, or abdomen
Often increases with deep breathing and lying flat, and may increase with coughing and swallowing
Can feel sharp and stabbing
Is often relieved by sitting up and leaning or bending forward
You may have
fever
,
chills
, or
sweating
if the condition is caused by an infection.
Other symptoms may include:
Ankle, feet, and leg swelling
Anxiety
Breathing difficulty when lying down
Dry
cough
Fatigue
Exams and Tests
When listening to the heart with a stethoscope, the health care provider can hear a sound called a pericardial rub. The
heart sounds
may be muffled or distant. There may be other signs of excess fluid in the pericardium (pericardial effusion).
If the disorder is severe, there may be:
Crackles in the lungs
Decreased breath sounds
Other signs of fluid in the space around the lungs
The following imaging tests may be done to check the heart and the tissue layer around it (pericardium):
Chest MRI scan
Chest x-ray
Echocardiogram
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Heart MRI
or heart
CT
scan
Radionuclide scanning
To look for heart muscle damage, the provider may order a troponin I test. Other laboratory tests may include:
Antinuclear antibody
(ANA)
Blood culture
CBC
C-reactive protein
(CRP)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (
ESR
)
HIV test
Rheumatoid factor
Tuberculin skin test
Treatment
The cause of pericarditis should be identified, if possible.
High doses of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen or indomethacin  are often given with a medicine called colchicine. These medicines will decrease your pain and reduce the swelling or inflammation in the sac around your heart. You will be asked to take them for days to weeks or longer in some cases.
If the cause of pericarditis is an infection:
Antibiotics will be used for bacterial infections
Antifungal medicines will be used for fungal pericarditis
Other medicines that may be used are:
Corticosteroids such as prednisone (in some people)
"Water pills" (diuretics) to remove excess fluid
Other anti-inflammatory agents
If the buildup of fluid makes the heart function poorly, treatment may include:
Draining the fluid from the sac. This procedure, called
pericardiocentesis
, is done using a needle, which is guided by ultrasound (echocardiography) in most cases.
Cutting a small hole (window) in the pericardium (subxiphoid pericardiotomy) to allow the infected fluid to drain into the abdominal cavity. This is done by a surgeon.
Surgery called pericardiectomy may be needed if the pericarditis is long-lasting, comes back after treatment, or causes scarring or tightening of the tissue around the heart. The operation involves cutting or removing part of the pericardium.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Pericarditis can range from mild illness that gets better on its own, to a life-threatening condition. Fluid buildup around the heart and poor heart function can complicate the disorder.
The outcome is good if pericarditis is treated right away. Most people recover in 2 weeks to 3 months. However, pericarditis may come back. This is called recurrent, or chronic, if symptoms or episodes continue.
Scarring and thickening of the sac-like covering and the heart muscle may occur when the problem is severe. This is called
constrictive pericarditis
. It can cause long-term problems similar to those of heart failure.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of pericarditis. This disorder is not life threatening most of the time. However, it can be very dangerous if not treated.
Prevention
Many cases cannot be prevented.
Images
Pericardium
Pericarditis
Bacterial pericarditis
References
Azarbal A, LeWinter MM. Pericarditis. In: Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds.
Conn's Current Therapy 2024
. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:148-152.
Chabrando JG, Bonaventura A, Vecchie A, et al. Management of acute and recurrent pericarditis: JACC state-of-the-art review.
J Am Coll Cardiol.
2020;75(1):76-92. PMID: 31918837
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31918837/
.
Knowlton KU, Savoia MC, Oxman MN. Myocarditis and pericarditis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 80.
Lewinter MM, Cremer PC, Klein AL. Pericardial diseases. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 86.
Review Date 2/27/2024
Updated by: Thomas S. Metkus, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine and Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pericardial Disorders