Basal ganglia dysfunction: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Basal ganglia dysfunction
Basal ganglia dysfunction
Basal ganglia dysfunction is a problem with the deep brain structures that help start and control movement.
Causes
Watch this video about:
Athetosis resulting from basal ganglia injury
Any condition that can cause brain injury can damage the basal ganglia. Such conditions include:
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Medicine or illegal drug overdose
Head injury
Infection
Liver disease
Metabolic
problems
Multiple sclerosis
(MS)
Poisoning with copper, manganese, or other heavy metals
Stroke
Tumors
A common cause of the symptoms of basal ganglia dysfunction is chronic use of medicines called antipsychotics, used to treat
schizophrenia
.
Many brain disorders are associated with basal ganglia dysfunction. They include:
Dystonia
(muscle tone problems)
Huntington disease
(nerve cells in certain parts of the brain waste away, or degenerate)
Multiple system atrophy
(widespread nervous system disorder)
Parkinson disease
Progressive supranuclear palsy
(movement disorder from damage to certain nerve cells in the brain)
Wilson disease
(disorder causing too much copper in the body's tissues)
Symptoms
Damage to the basal ganglia cells may cause problems controlling speech, movement, and posture. This combination of symptoms is called parkinsonism.
A person with basal ganglia dysfunction may have trouble starting, stopping, or sustaining movement. Depending on which area of the brain is affected, there may also be problems with memory and other thought processes.
In general, symptoms vary and may include:
Movement changes, such as involuntary or slowed movements
Increased muscle tone
Muscle spasms and muscle rigidity
Problems finding words
Tremor
Uncontrollable, repeated movements, speech, or cries (tics)
Walking difficulty
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and medical history.
Blood and imaging tests may be needed. These may include:
CT
and
MRI
of the head
Genetic testing
Magnetic resonance angiography
(MRA) to look at the blood vessels in the neck and brain
Positron emission tomography
(PET) to look at the metabolism of the brain
Blood tests to check blood sugar, thyroid function, liver function, and iron and copper levels
Treatment
Treatment depends on the cause of the disorder. Most people may benefit from physical therapy to reduce the risk of falling. Occupational therapy can help them remain independent. Speech therapy is helpful for those who have trouble swallowing or speaking.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the cause of the dysfunction. Some causes are reversible, while others require lifelong treatment.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have any:
Abnormal or involuntary movements
Falls without known reason
If you or others notice that you are shaky or slow
Alternative Names
Extrapyramidal syndrome; Antipsychotics - extrapyramidal
References
Jankovic J. Parkinson disease and other movement disorders. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 96.
Okun MS, Ostrem JL. Other movement disorders. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 379.
Vestal E, Rusher A, Ikeda K, Melnick M. Disorders of the basal nuclei. In: Lazaro RT, Reina-Guerra SG, Quiben MU, eds.
Umphred's Neurological Rehabilitation
. 7th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2020:chap 18.
Review Date 6/13/2024
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Brain Diseases