Aortic regurgitation: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Aortic regurgitation
Aortic regurgitation
Aortic regurgitation is a heart valve disease in which the aortic valve does not close tightly. This allows blood to flow from the aorta (the largest blood vessel) into the left ventricle (a chamber of the heart).
Causes
Any condition that prevents the aortic valve from closing completely can cause this problem. When the valve does not close all the way, some blood comes back each time the heart beats.
When a large amount of blood comes back, the heart must work harder to force out enough blood to meet the body's needs. The left lower chamber (left ventricle) of the heart widens (dilates) and the heart beats very strongly (
bounding pulse
). Over time, the heart becomes less able to supply enough blood to the body.
In the past,
rheumatic fever
was the main cause of aortic regurgitation. The use of antibiotics to treat strep infections has made rheumatic fever less common. Therefore, aortic regurgitation is more commonly due to other causes. These include:
Ankylosing spondylitis
Aortic dissection
Congenital (present at birth) valve problems, such as bicuspid valve
Endocarditis
(infection of the heart valves)
High blood pressure
Marfan syndrome
Reiter syndrome
(also known as reactive arthritis)
Syphilis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Trauma to the chest
Aortic insufficiency is most common in men between the ages of 30 and 60.
Symptoms
The condition often has no symptoms for many years. Symptoms may come on slowly or suddenly. They may include:
Bounding pulse
Chest pain
similar to
angina
(rare)
Fainting
Fatigue
Palpitations
(sensation of the heart beating)
Shortness of breath
with activity or when lying down
Waking up short of breath after falling asleep
Swelling of the feet, legs, or abdomen
Uneven, rapid, racing, pounding, or fluttering
pulse
Weakness
that is more likely to occur with activity
Exams and Tests
Signs may include:
Heart murmur that can be heard through a stethoscope
Very forceful beating of the heart
Bobbing of the head in time with the heartbeat
Hard pulses in the arms and legs
Low diastolic blood pressure
Signs of fluid in the lungs
Aortic regurgitation may be seen on tests such as:
Aortic angiography
Echocardiogram
-- ultrasound examination of the heart
Left heart catheterization
MRI or CT scan of the heart
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) or transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE)
chest x-ray
may show swelling of the left lower heart chamber.
Lab tests cannot diagnose aortic insufficiency. However, they may help check for other causes of symptoms.
Treatment
You may not need treatment if you have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. However, you will need to see a health care provider for regular exams and echocardiograms.
Diuretics (water pills) or other types of medicines may be prescribed for symptoms of heart failure.
In the past, most people with heart valve problems were given antibiotics before dental work or an invasive procedure, such as colonoscopy. The antibiotics were given to prevent an infection of the damaged heart. However, antibiotics are now used much less often.
You may need to limit activity that requires more work from your heart. Talk to your provider.
Surgery to repair or replace the aortic valve corrects aortic regurgitation. The decision to have aortic valve replacement depends on your symptoms and the condition and function of your heart. There is increasing interest in a minimally invasive procedure in which a replacement valve is implanted via catheter. This is similar to a procedure traditionally done in people with aortic stenosis. This option may become more common in the future.
You may also need surgery to repair the aorta if it is enlarged.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Surgery can cure aortic insufficiency and relieve symptoms, unless you develop heart failure or other complications. People with angina or congestive heart failure due to aortic regurgitation do poorly without treatment.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Abnormal heart rhythms
Heart failure
Infection in the heart
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You have symptoms of aortic regurgitation.
You have aortic insufficiency and your symptoms worsen or new symptoms develop (especially chest pain,
difficulty breathing
, or
swelling
).
Prevention
Blood pressure control is very important if you are at risk for aortic regurgitation.
Alternative Names
Aortic valve prolapse; Aortic insufficiency; Heart valve - aortic regurgitation; Valvular disease - aortic regurgitation; AI - aortic insufficiency
Images
Aortic insufficiency
References
Bonow RO, Nishimura RA. Aortic Regurgitation. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 73.
Carabello BA, Kodali S. Valvular heart disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 60.
Leon MB, Mack MJ. Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 74.
Writing Committee Members, Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
. 2021;162(2):e183-e353. PMID: 33972115
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33972115/
.
Review Date 2/27/2024
Updated by: Thomas S. Metkus, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine and Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Heart Valve Diseases