Stridor: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Stridor
Stridor
Stridor is an abnormal, high-pitched, musical breathing sound. It is caused by a blockage in the throat or voice box (larynx). It is most often heard when taking in a breath.
Considerations
Children are at higher risk of airway blockage because they have narrower airways than adults. In young children, stridor is a sign of airway blockage. It must be treated right away to prevent the airway from becoming completely closed.
The airway can be blocked by an object, swollen tissues of the throat or upper airway, or a spasm of the airway muscles or the vocal cords.
Causes
Common causes of stridor include:
Airway injury
Allergic reaction
Problem breathing and a barking cough (
croup
)
Diagnostic tests such as
bronchoscopy
or
laryngoscopy
Epiglottitis
, which is inflammation of the movable cartilage that covers the windpipe
Inhaling an object such as a peanut or marble (
foreign body aspiration
)
Swelling and irritation of the voice box (
laryngitis
)
Neck surgery
Use of a breathing tube for a long time
Secretions such as phlegm (sputum)
Smoke inhalation or other inhalation injury
Swelling of the neck or face
Swollen tonsils or adenoids (such as with
tonsillitis
)
Vocal cord cancer
Home Care
Follow your  health care provider's  advice to treat the cause of the problem.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Stridor may be a sign of an emergency. Contact your provider right away if there is unexplained stridor, especially in a child.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
In an emergency, your provider will check your temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure, and may need to do
abdominal thrusts
to clear the airway.
A breathing tube may be needed if you can't breathe properly.
After you are stable, your provider may ask about your medical history, and perform a physical exam. This includes listening to your lungs.
Parents or caregivers may be asked the following medical history questions:
Is the abnormal breathing a high-pitched sound?
Did the breathing problem start suddenly?
Could the child have put something in their mouth?
Has the child been ill recently?
Is the child's neck or face swollen?
Has the child been coughing or complaining of a sore throat?
What other symptoms does the child have? (For example,
nasal flaring
or a bluish color to the skin, lips, or nails)
Is the child using chest muscles to breathe (
intercostal retractions
)?
Tests that may be done include:
Arterial blood gas analysis
Bronchoscopy
Chest CT scan
Laryngoscopy (examination of the voice box)
Pulse oximetry to measure blood oxygen level
X-ray of the chest
or neck
Alternative Names
Breathing sounds - abnormal; Extrathoracic airway obstruction; Wheezing - stridor
Images
Upper respiratory tract
References
Griffiths AG. Chronic or recurrent respiratory symptoms. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 401.
Rose E. Pediatric upper airway obstruction and infections. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 162.
Zalzal HG, Zalzal GH. Stridor in the Infant Patient.
Pediatr Clin North Am
. 2022;69(2):301-317. PMID: 35337541
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35337541/
.
Review Date 4/1/2024
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Breathing Problems