Botulism: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Botulism
Botulism
Botulism is a rare but serious illness caused by
Clostridium botulinum
bacteria. The bacteria may enter the body through wounds or by eating improperly canned or preserved food.
Causes
Clostridium botulinum
are found in soil and untreated water throughout the world. The bacteria produce protective
spores
to help them survive. In certain conditions, such as improperly preserved or canned food, these spores can grow and produce a toxin. When eaten, even tiny amounts of this toxin can lead to severe poisoning.
Foods that can be contaminated include:
Home-canned vegetables
Cured pork and ham
Smoked or raw fish
Honey or corn syrup
Baked potatoes cooked in foil
Carrot juice
Chopped garlic in oil
Infant botulism occurs when a baby eats
Clostridium botulinum
spores and the bacteria grow in the baby's intestines. The most common cause of
infant botulism
is eating honey or corn syrup or using pacifiers that have been coated with honey.
Clostridium botulinum
can be found normally in the stool of some infants. Infants develop botulism when the bacteria grow in their gut.
Botulism may also occur if the bacteria enter open wounds and produce toxins there.
About 110 cases of botulism are reported in the United States each year. Most of the cases are in infants.
Symptoms
Symptoms often appear 8 to 36 hours after you eat food contaminated with the toxin. There is no fever with this infection.
In adults, symptoms may include:
Abdominal cramps
Breathing difficulty
that may lead to respiratory failure
Difficulty swallowing and speaking
Double vision
Nausea
Vomiting
Weakness with paralysis (equal on both sides of the body)
Symptoms in infants may include:
Constipation
Drooling
Poor feeding and weak sucking
Respiratory distress
Weak cry
Weakness, loss of muscle tone
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. The exam may find:
Absent or decreased deep tendon reflexes
Absent or decreased gag reflex
Eyelid drooping
Loss of muscle function, starting at the top of the body and moving down
Paralyzed bowel
Speech impairment
Urine retention with inability to urinate
Blurred vision
No fever
Blood tests can be done to identify the toxin. A
stool culture
may also be ordered. Lab tests can be done on the suspected food to confirm botulism.
Treatment
You will need medicine to fight the toxin produced by the bacteria. The medicine is called botulism antitoxin.
You will have to stay in the hospital if you have breathing trouble. A tube may be inserted through the nose or mouth into the windpipe to provide an airway for oxygen. You may need a breathing machine.
People who have trouble swallowing may be given fluids through a vein (by IV). A feeding tube may be inserted.
Providers must tell state health authorities or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention about people with botulism, so that the contaminated food is removed from stores.
Some people are given antibiotics, but they may not always help.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Prompt treatment greatly reduces the risk for death.
Possible Complications
Health problems that may result from botulism include:
Aspiration pneumonia
and infection
Long-lasting weakness
Nervous system problems for up to 1 year
Respiratory distress
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Go to the emergency room or call 911 or the local emergency number if you suspect botulism.
Prevention
NEVER give honey or corn syrup to infants younger than 1 year old. Never give even just a little taste on a pacifier.
Help prevent infant botulism by breastfeeding only, if possible.
Always throw away bulging cans or foul-smelling preserved foods. Sterilize home-canned foods by pressure cooking them at 250 °F (121 °C) for 30 minutes. This can reduce the risk for botulism.
See the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website for more information on home canning safety at
www.cdc.gov/botulism/prevention/home-canned-foods.html
.
Keep foil-wrapped baked potatoes hot or in the refrigerator. Do not store at room temperature. Carrot juice and oils with garlic or other herbs should also be refrigerated. Make sure to set the refrigerator temperature at 40 °F (10 °C) or lower.
Alternative Names
Infant botulism
Images
Bacteria
References
Birch TB, Bleck TP. Botulism (
Clostridium botulinum
). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 245.
Norton LE, Schleiss MR. Botulism (
Clostridium botulinum
). In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 237.
Review Date 8/26/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Botulism