Hemolytic crisis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hemolytic crisis
Hemolytic crisis
Hemolytic crisis occurs when large numbers of red blood cells are destroyed over a short time. The loss of red blood cells occurs much faster than the body can produce new red blood cells.
Considerations
During a hemolytic crisis, the body cannot make enough red blood cells to replace those that are destroyed. This causes
acute
and often severe
anemia
.
The part of red blood cells that carries oxygen (hemoglobin) is released into the bloodstream. This can lead to kidney damage.
Causes
Causes of hemolysis include:
A lack of certain proteins inside red blood cells
Autoimmune diseases
Certain infections
Defects in the hemoglobin molecules inside red blood cells
Defects of the proteins that make up the internal framework of red blood cells
Side effects of certain medicines
Reactions to blood transfusions
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have:
Symptoms of anemia, including pale skin or fatigue, especially if these symptoms get worse
Urine that is red, red-brown, or brown (tea-colored)
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Emergency treatment may be necessary. This may include a hospital stay, oxygen,
blood transfusions
, and other treatments.
When your condition is stable, your provider will perform a
physical examination
and ask about your medical history and symptoms. The physical exam may show swelling of the spleen (
splenomegaly
).
Tests that may be done include:
Blood chemistry panel
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Coombs test
Haptoglobin
Lactate dehydrogenase
Treatment depends on the cause of hemolysis.
Alternative Names
Hemolysis - acute
Images
Hemoglobin
References
Gallagher PG. Hemolytic anemias: red blood cell membrane and metabolic defects. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 147.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Anemia
Blood Disorders