Swallowing soap: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Swallowing soap
Swallowing soap
This article discusses the health effects that may occur from swallowing soap. This can happen by accident or on purpose. Swallowing soap does not usually cause serious problems.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Most bar soaps are considered harmless (nontoxic), but some may contain ingredients that can be harmful if they are swallowed.
Where Found
Various bar soaps
Symptoms
Symptoms that might occur are:
Diarrhea
Vomiting
Home Care
DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Give the person water or milk right away, unless a provider tells you not to. DO NOT give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The person may not need to go to the emergency room.
If they do go, the provider will measure and monitor their vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. This may include giving fluids and medicines through a vein (IV).
Outlook (Prognosis)
People usually recover after swallowing soap.
How well someone does depends on how much soap they swallowed and how quickly they receive medical care (if care is needed).
Alternative Names
Soap - swallowing; Soap ingestion
References
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Theobald JL, Kostic MA. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 77.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cosmetics