Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome is a group of conditions passed down through families. The disorder involves the skin, nervous system, eyes,
endocrine
glands, urinary and reproductive systems, and bones.
It causes an unusual facial appearance and a higher risk for skin cancers and noncancerous tumors.
Causes
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome is a rare genetic condition. The main gene linked to the syndrome is known as PTCH (patched). A second gene, called SUFU, has also been associated with this condition.
Variations in these genes are most commonly passed down through families as an
autosomal dominant
trait. This means you develop the syndrome if either parent passes the gene to you. If either of your parents has this syndrome, you have a 50% chance of having it. It is also possible to develop this gene variation with no family history.
Symptoms
Main symptoms of this disorder are:
A type of skin cancer called
basal cell carcinoma
that develops around the time of puberty
A noncancerous tumor of the jaw, called keratocystic odontogenic tumor that also develops during puberty
Other symptoms include:
Broad nose
Cleft palate
Heavy, protruding brow
Jaw that sticks out (in some cases)
Wide-set eyes
Pitting on palms and soles
The condition may affect the nervous system and lead to:
Eye problems
Deafness
Intellectual disability
Seizures
Tumors of the brain
The condition also leads to bone defects, including:
Curvature of the back (
scoliosis)
Severe curvature of the back (
kyphosis
)
Abnormal ribs
Exams and Tests
There may be a family history of this disorder and a past history of basal cell skin cancers.
Tests may reveal:
Brain tumors
Cysts in the jaw, which can lead to abnormal tooth development or jaw fractures
Abnormalities in the colored part (iris) or lens of the eye
Head swelling due to fluid on the brain (
hydrocephalus)
Rib abnormalities
Tests that may be done include:
Echocardiogram
(ultrasound of the heart)
Genetic testing (in some people)
MRI of the brain
Skin biopsy
of tumors
X-rays of the bones,
teeth
, and skull
Ultrasound
to check for ovarian tumors
Treatment
It is important to get examined by a skin specialist (dermatologist) often, so that skin cancers may be treated while they are still small.
People with this disorder may also be seen and treated by other specialists, depending on which part of the body is affected. For example, a cancer specialist (oncologist) may treat tumors in the body, and an orthopedic surgeon may help treat bone problems.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Frequent follow-up with a variety of specialists is important for having a good outcome.
Possible Complications
People with this condition may develop:
Blindness
Brain tumor
Deafness
Fractures
Ovarian tumors
Cardiac fibromas
Skin damage and severe scarring due to skin cancers
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if:
You or any family members have nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, especially if you are planning to have a child.
You have a child who has symptoms of this disorder.
Prevention
Couples with a family history of this syndrome might consider
genetic counseling
before becoming pregnant.
Staying out of the sun and using sunscreen can help prevent new basal cell skin cancers.
Avoid radiation such as x-rays. People with this condition are very sensitive to radiation. Exposure to radiation can lead to skin cancers.
Alternative Names
NBCC syndrome; Gorlin syndrome; Gorlin-Goltz syndrome; Basal cell nevus syndrome (BCNS); Basal cell cancer - nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome
Images
Basal cell nevus syndrome - close-up of palm
Basal cell nevus syndrome - plantar pits
Basal cell nevus syndrome - face and hand
Basal cell nevus syndrome
Basal cell nevus syndrome - face
References
Epstein EH. Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (Gorlin syndrome). In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Coulson IH, Murrell DF, eds.
Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies.
6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 170.
Martin KL. Tumors of the skin. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 711.
Walsh MF, Cadoo K, Salo-Mullen EE, Dubard-Gault M, Stadler ZK, Offit K. Genetic factors: hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology.
6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 13.
Review Date 5/28/2024
Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Skin Cancer