Joint x-ray: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Joint x-ray
Joint x-ray
This test is an
x-ray
of a knee, shoulder, hip, wrist, ankle, or other joint.
How the Test is Performed
The test is done in a hospital radiology department or in your health care provider's office. Your x-ray technician will help you position the joint to be x-rayed on the table. Once in place, pictures are taken. The joint may be
moved into other positions for more images.
How to Prepare for the Test
Tell your provider if you are pregnant. Remove all jewelry before the x-ray.
How the Test will Feel
The x-ray is painless. It may be uncomfortable to move the joint into different positions.
Why the Test is Performed
The x-ray is used to detect
fractures
, dislocations,
tumors
, or degenerative conditions of the joint.
What Abnormal Results Mean
The x-ray may show:
Arthritis
Fractures
Dislocation of the joint
Bone tumors
Degenerative bone conditions
Osteomyelitis
(infection of the bone)
The test may also be performed to find out more about the following conditions:
Acute gouty arthritis (gout)
Adult-onset Still disease
Caplan syndrome
Chondromalacia patellae
Chronic gouty arthritis
Congenital dislocation of the hip
Fungal arthritis
Non-gonococcal (septic) bacterial arthritis
Osteoarthritis
Pseudogout
Psoriatic arthritis
Reiter syndrome
Rheumatoid arthritis
Runner's knee
Tuberculous arthritis
Risks
There is low radiation exposure. X-ray machines are set to provide the smallest amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits. Children and the fetuses of pregnant women are more sensitive to the risks of the x-ray. A protective shield may be worn over areas not being scanned.
Alternative Names
X-ray - joint
Images
Hand X-ray
References
Contreras F, Perez J, Jose J. Imaging overview. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.
DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 7.
Kapoor G, Toms AP. Current status of imaging of the musculoskeletal system. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.
Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 38.
Review Date 4/1/2025
Updated by: Jason Levy, MD, FSIR, Northside Radiology Associates, Atlanta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Arthritis
Bone Cancer
Bone Diseases
Fractures
Joint Disorders
X-Rays