Tongue biopsy: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Tongue biopsy
Tongue biopsy
A tongue biopsy is a minor surgery that is done to remove a small piece of the tongue. The tissue is then examined under a microscope.
How the Test is Performed
A tongue biopsy can be done using a needle.
You will get numbing medicine at the place where the biopsy is to be done.
The health care provider will gently insert the needle into the tongue and remove a tiny piece of tissue.
Some types of tongue biopsies remove a thin slice of tissue. Medicine to numb the area (local anesthetic) will be used. Others are done under general anesthesia, (allowing you to be asleep and pain-free) so that a larger area may be removed and examined.
How to Prepare for the Test
You may be told not to eat or drink anything for several hours before the test.
How the Test will Feel
Your tongue is very sensitive so a needle biopsy may be uncomfortable even when numbing medicine is used.
Your tongue can be tender or sore, and it may feel slightly swollen after the biopsy. You may have stitches or an open sore where the biopsy was done.
Why the Test is Performed
The test is done to find the cause of abnormal growths or suspicious-looking areas of the tongue.
Normal Results
The tongue tissue is normal when examined.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may mean:
Amyloidosis
Tongue (oral) cancer
Viral ulcer
Benign
tumors
Risks
Risks for this procedure include:
Bleeding
Infection
Swelling
of the tongue (can obstruct the airway and cause
breathing difficulty
)
Complications from this procedure are rare.
Alternative Names
Biopsy - tongue
Images
Throat anatomy
Tongue biopsy
References
Bauman JE. Head and neck cancer. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 176.
Ellis E, Huber MA. Principles of differential diagnosis and biopsy. In: Hupp JR, Ellis E, Tucker MR, eds. C
ontemporary Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 22.
Wein RO, Weber RS. Malignant neoplasms of the oral cavity. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 91.
Review Date 1/29/2025
Updated by: Ashutosh Kacker, MD, FACS,  Professor of Clinical Otolaryngology, Weill Cornell Medical College, and Attending Otolaryngologist, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Biopsy
Oral Cancer
Tongue Disorders