Jewelry cleaner poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Jewelry cleaner poisoning
Jewelry cleaner poisoning
This article discusses the harmful effects that can occur from swallowing jewelry cleaner or breathing in its fumes.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Poisonous ingredients include:
Ammonia
Corrosive alkali
Detergent
Soap
Where Found
Jewelry cleaners and polishes are sold under various brand names. Some include:
Goddard's Jewelry Cleaner
Goddard's Silver Dip
Hagerty Jewelry Cleaner
Weiman Silver Polish
Wright's Silver Cream
Note: This list may not be all-inclusive.
Symptoms
Jewelry cleaner poisoning can cause symptoms in many parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Breathing difficulty (from breathing in chemicals)
Throat swelling (may also cause breathing difficulty)
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Severe pain in the throat
Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue
Vision loss
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
Abdominal pain (severe)
Bloody stools
Burns and possible holes of the esophagus (food pipe)
Vomiting, possibly with blood
HEART AND BLOOD
Collapse
Low blood pressure (develops rapidly), leading to shock
Severe change in blood acid level (leads to organ damage)
SKIN
Burns
Holes in the skin or underlying tissues
Irritation
Home Care
Get medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider.
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person water or milk, unless instructed otherwise by a provider.
Before Calling Emergency
Get the following information:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen through a tube into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator)
Bronchoscopy -- camera down the throat to look for burns in the airways and lungs (if the poison was aspirated)
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Endoscopy -- camera down the throat to look for burns in the esophagus and the stomach
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicine to reverse the effect of the poison and treat symptoms
Surgical removal of burned skin (skin debridement)
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to aspirate (suck out) the stomach. This is done only when the person gets medical care within 30 to 45 minutes of the poisoning, and a very large amount of the substance has been swallowed
Washing of the skin (irrigation) -- perhaps every few hours for several days
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster the person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Swallowing such poisons can have severe effects on many parts of the body. Burns in the airway or gastrointestinal tract can lead to tissue death. This may result in infection, shock and death, even several months after substance was swallowed. Scar tissue in the affected areas can lead to long-term problems with breathing, swallowing, and digestion.
References
Hoyte C. Caustics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 143.
Schoem SR, Rosbe KW, Lee ER. Aerodigestive foreign bodies and caustic ingestions. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 211.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.