Infectious myringitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Infectious myringitis
Infectious myringitis
Infectious myringitis is an infection that causes painful
blisters
on the eardrum (tympanic membrane).
Causes
Infectious myringitis is caused by the same viruses or bacteria that cause middle ear infections. The most common of these is mycoplasma. It is often found along with the
common cold
or other similar infections. It may also cause pneumonia.
The condition is most often seen in children, but it may also occur in adults. .
Symptoms
The main symptom is pain that lasts for 24 to 48 hours. Other symptoms include:
Draining from the ear
Pressure in the affected ear
Hearing loss
in the painful ear
Rarely, the hearing loss will continue after the infection has cleared.
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will do an exam of your ear to look for blisters on the ear drum.
Treatment
Infectious myringitis is usually treated with antibiotics. These may be given by mouth or as drops in the ear. If the pain is severe, small cuts may be made in the blisters so they can drain. Pain-killing medicines may be prescribed, as well.
Alternative Names
Bullous myringitis
References
Haddad J, Dodhia SN. External otitis (otitis externa). In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 679.
Holzman RS, Simberkoff MS, Leaf HL. Mycoplasma pneumonia and atypical pneumonia. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 183.
Quanquin NM, Cherry JD. Mycoplasma and ureaplasma infections. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.
Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 196.
Review Date 5/2/2024
Updated by: Josef Shargorodsky, MD, MPH, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Ear Infections