Pain medications - narcotics: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pain medications - narcotics
Pain medications - narcotics
Narcotics are also called opioid pain relievers. They are only used for pain that is severe and is not helped by other types of painkillers. When used carefully and under a health care provider's direct care, these medicines can be effective and safe at reducing pain.
Information
Narcotics work by binding to receptors in the brain, which blocks the feeling of pain.
You should not use a narcotic medicine for more than 3 to 4 months, unless your provider instructs you otherwise. Most people use them for much shorter periods of time, days to weeks.
NAMES OF COMMON NARCOTICS
Codeine
Fentanyl -- available as a patch, lozenge, or lollipop
Hydrocodone
Hydromorphone
Meperidine
Morphine
Oxycodone
Tramadol
TAKING NARCOTICS
Narcotic pain medicines may be prescribed to treat:
Acute pain, such as from injuries, surgery or other procedures, and other short-term medical problems.
Chronic pain, present for 3 months or more. This type of pain may be due to injuries or diseases involving the nervous system, as well as many other chronic conditions.
There are a wide variety of non-narcotic or nonopioid treatments for pain. Medicine options are available to treat both types of pain.
These medicines can be misused and habit-forming. Always take narcotics as prescribed. Your provider may suggest that you take your medicine only when you feel pain.
Or, your provider may suggest taking a narcotic on a regular schedule. Allowing the medicine to wear off before taking more of it can make the pain more difficult to control.
Contact your provider right away if you feel you are addicted to the medicine. A sign of
addiction
is a strong craving for the medicine that you can't control.
Taking narcotics to control the pain of cancer or other medical problems does not itself lead to addiction.
Store narcotics safely and securely in your home.
You may need a pain specialist to help you manage long-term pain.
SIDE EFFECTS OF NARCOTICS
Drowsiness and impaired judgment often occur with these medicines. When taking a narcotic, do not drink alcohol, drive, or operate heavy machinery.
You can relieve itching due to a narcotic by reducing the dose or talking to your provider about switching medicines.
To help with constipation, drink more fluids, get more exercise, eat foods with extra fiber, and use stool softeners.
If nausea or vomiting occur, try taking the narcotic with food.
Withdrawal symptoms
are common when you stop taking a narcotic. Symptoms include strong desire for the medicine (craving), yawning, insomnia, restlessness, mood swings, or diarrhea. To prevent withdrawal symptoms, your provider may recommend you gradually lower the dosage over time.
OVERDOSE RISK
Opioid overdose is a major risk if you take a narcotic medicine for a long time. Before you are prescribed a narcotic, your provider may first do the following:
Screen you to see if you are at risk for or already have an opioid use problem.
Teach you and your family how to respond if you have an overdose. You may be prescribed and instructed how to use a medicine called naloxone in case you have an overdose of your narcotic medicine.
Alternative Names
Painkillers; Drugs for pain; Analgesics; Opioids
References
Copenhaver D, Hoss R, Cortazzo MH, Vuong I, Fishman SM. Major opioids and chronic opioid therapy. In: Benzon H, ed.
Practical Management of Pain
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 48.
Dowell D, Ragan KR, Jones CM, Baldwin GT, Chou R. CDC clinical practice guideline for prescribing opioids for pain - United States, 2022.
MMWR Recomm Rep
. 2022;71(3):1-95. PMID: 36327391
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36327391/
.
Holtsman M, Hale C. Opioids used for mild to moderate pain. In: Benzon HT, Raja SN, Liu SS, Fishman SM, Cohen SP, eds.
Essentials of Pain Medicine
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 43.
Skelly AC, Chou R, Dettori JR, et al. Noninvasive nonpharmacological treatment for chronic pain: A systematic review [Internet]. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US); 2020 Apr. Report No.: 20-EHC009. PMID: 32338846
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32338846/
.
Review Date 4/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pain Relievers