Tonsillectomies and children: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Tonsillectomies and children
Tonsillectomies and children
Today, many parents wonder if it is wise for children to have their tonsils taken out.
Tonsillectomy
may be recommended if your child has any of the following:
Difficulty swallowing
Obstructed breathing during sleep
Throat infections or throat abscesses that keep returning
In most cases, inflammation of the tonsils can be successfully treated with antibiotics. There are always risks associated with surgery.
You and your child's health care provider may consider a tonsillectomy if:
Your child has frequent infections (7 or more times in 1 year, 5 or more times per year over 2 years, or 3 or more times per year over 3 years).
Your child misses a lot of school.
Your child snores, has trouble breathing, and has sleep apnea.
Your child has an abscess or growth on their tonsils.
Alternative Names
Children and tonsillectomies
Images
Tonsillectomy
References
Goldstein NA. Evaluation and management of pediatric obstructive sleep apnea. In: Lesperance MM, ed.
Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology
. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 3.
Mitchell RB, Archer SM, Ishman SL, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: tonsillectomy in children (update).
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
. 2019;160(1_suppl):S1-S42. PMID: 30798778
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30798778/
.
Wetmore RF. Tonsils and adenoids. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 411.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Tonsillitis