Sturge-Weber syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Sturge-Weber syndrome
Sturge-Weber syndrome
Sturge-Weber syndrome (SWS) is a rare disorder that is present at birth. A child with this condition will have a port-wine stain birthmark (usually on the face) and may have nervous system problems.
Causes
In many people, the cause of Sturge-Weber is due to a variation of the
GNAQ
gene. This gene affects small blood vessels called capillaries in some but not all body cells. Problems in the capillaries cause the
port-wine stains
to form.
Sturge-Weber is not thought to be passed down (inherited) through families.
Symptoms
Symptoms of SWS include:
Port-wine stain (more common on the upper face and eyelid than the rest of the body)
Seizures
Headache
Paralysis
or weakness on one side
Learning disabilities
Glaucoma (very high fluid pressure in the eye)
Low thyroid function (
hypothyroidism
)
Exams and Tests
The health care provider should check all birthmarks, including a port-wine stain.
Glaucoma
may be one sign of the condition.
Tests may include:
CT scan
MRI scan
X-rays
Treatment
Treatment is based on the person's signs and symptoms, and may include:
Anticonvulsant medicines for seizures
Eye drops or surgery to treat glaucoma
Laser therapy
for port-wine stains
Physical therapy for paralysis or weakness
Possible brain surgery to prevent seizures
Support Groups
More information and support for people with SWS and their families can be found at:
The Sturge-Weber Foundation --
sturge-weber.org
National Organization for Rare Disorders --
rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/sturge-weber-syndrome/#supporting-organizations
NIH Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center --
rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/7706/sturge-weber-syndrome
>
Outlook (Prognosis)
SWS is usually not life threatening. The condition does need regular lifelong follow-up. The person's quality of life depends on how well their symptoms (such as seizures) can be prevented or treated.
The person will need to visit an eye doctor (ophthalmologist) at least once a year to check for or treat glaucoma. They also will need to see a neurologist to treat seizures and other nervous system symptoms.
Possible Complications
These complications can occur:
Abnormal blood vessel growth in the skull
Continued growth of the port-wine stain
Developmental delays
Emotional and behavioral problems
Glaucoma, which may lead to blindness
Paralysis
Seizures
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Seizures, vision problems, paralysis, and changes in alertness or mental state may mean the coverings of the brain are involved. These symptoms should be evaluated right away.
Prevention
There is no known prevention.
Alternative Names
Encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis; SWS
Images
Sturge-Weber syndrome - soles of feet
Sturge-Weber syndrome - legs
Port wine stain on a child's face
References
Dinulos JGH. Vascular tumors and malformations. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 23.
Flemming KD, Brown RD. Epidemiology and natural history of intracranial vascular malformations. In: Winn HR, ed.
Youmans and Winn Neurological Surgery.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 451.
Islam MP, Roach ES. Neurocutaneous syndromes. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 99.
Sahin M, Ullrich N, Srivastava S, Pinto AL. Neurocutaneous syndromes. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 636.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Associate Professor in Medical Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Birthmarks
Vascular Diseases