Antifreeze poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Antifreeze poisoning
Antifreeze poisoning
Antifreeze is a liquid used to cool engines. It is also called engine coolant. This article discusses poisoning caused by swallowing antifreeze.
This is for information only and not for use in the treatment or management of an actual poison exposure. If you have an exposure, you should call your local emergency number (such as 911) or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
The poisonous ingredients in antifreeze are:
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Propylene glycol
Where Found
The above ingredients are found in various antifreezes. They may also be used in other products.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of antifreeze poisoning in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Rapid breathing
No breathing
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Blood in urine
No urine output
or decreased urine output
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Blurred vision
Blindness
HEART AND BLOOD
Rapid heartbeat
Low blood pressure
MUSCLES AND JOINTS
Leg cramps
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Coma
Convulsions
Dizziness
Fatigue
Headache
Slurred speech
Stupor
(lack of alertness)
Unconsciousness
Unsteady walk
Weakness
SKIN
Blue lips and fingernails
STOMACH AND GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Nausea and vomiting
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Use standard first aid and CPR for signs of shock or no heartbeat (cardiac arrest). Call your local poison control center or 911 for more help.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product (as well as the ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free
Poison Help hotline
(1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the throat, and breathing machine
Chest x-ray
CT scan of the head (computed tomography)
ECG (electrocardiogram or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (through a vein)
Medicines to reverse the effects of the poison
Tube placed down the nose and into the stomach (sometimes)
Dialysis (kidney machine) treatment may be needed during recovery. This need may be permanent if kidney damage is severe.
Outlook (Prognosis)
For ethylene glycol: Death may occur within the first 24 hours. If the patient survives, there may be little or no urine output for several weeks before the kidneys recover. Kidney damage may be permanent. Any brain damage that occurs also may be permanent.
For methanol: Methanol is extremely toxic. As little as 2 tablespoons (1 ounce or 30 milliliters) can kill a child, and 4 to 16 tablespoons (2 to 8 ounces or 60 to 240 milliliters) can be deadly for an adult. The outcome depends on how much was swallowed and how soon appropriate care was given. Vision loss or blindness may be permanent
Permanent damage to the nervous system may occur. This can cause blindness, decreased mental functioning, and a condition similar to Parkinson disease.
Keep all chemicals, cleaners, and industrial products in their original containers and marked as poison, and out of the reach of children. This will reduce the risk for poisoning and overdose.
Alternative Names
Engine coolant poisoning
References
Nelson ME. Toxic alcohols. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 136.
Thomas SHL. Poisoning. In: Penman ID, Ralston SH, Strachan MWJ, Hobson RP, eds.
Davidson's Principles and Practice of Medicine
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 10.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.