Lactate dehydrogenase test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Lactate dehydrogenase test
Lactate dehydrogenase test
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is a protein that helps produce energy in the body. An LDH test measures the amount of LDH in the blood.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
No specific preparation is necessary.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
LDH is most often measured to check for tissue damage. LDH is in many body tissues, especially the heart, liver, kidney, muscles, brain, blood cells, and lungs.
Other conditions for which the test may be done include:
Low red blood cell count (
anemia
)
Cancer, including blood cancer (
leukemia
) or lymph cancer (lymphoma)
Normal Results
Normal value range is 125 to 220 international units per liter (IU/L).
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
A higher-than-normal level may indicate:
Blood flow deficiency (ischemia)
Heart attack
Hemolytic anemia
Infectious mononucleosis
Leukemia or lymphoma
Liver disease
(for example,
hepatitis
)
Low blood pressure
Muscle injury
Muscle weakness and loss of muscle tissue (
muscular dystrophy
)
New abnormal tissue formation (usually cancer)
Pancreatitis
Stroke
Tissue death
If your LDH level is high, your provider may recommend an
LDH isoenzymes test
to determine the location of any tissue damage.
Risks
There is little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting
or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma
(blood buildup under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Alternative Names
LDH test; Lactic acid dehydrogenase test
Images
Blood test
References
Panteghini M. Serum enzymes. In: Rifai N, Chiu RWK, Young I, Burnham CD, Wittwer CT, eds.
Tietz Textbook of Laboratory Medicine
. 7th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2023:chap 32.
Pincus MR, Carty RP. Clinical enzymology. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 21.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Anemia
Cancer
Heart Attack
Infectious Mononucleosis
Liver Diseases
Muscle Disorders
Muscular Dystrophy
Pancreatic Diseases
Stroke