Viral arthritis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Viral arthritis
Viral arthritis
Viral arthritis is
swelling
and irritation (inflammation) of a joint caused by a viral infection.
Causes
Arthritis
may be a symptom of many virus-related illnesses. It usually disappears on its own without any lasting effects.
It may occur with infection by:
Enterovirus
Dengue virus
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Human parvovirus
Mumps
Rubella
Alphaviruses, including chikungunya
Cytomegalovirus
Zika virus
Adenovirus
Epstein-Barr virus
Ebola virus
Note
: This list is not all inclusive.
It may also occur after immunization with the rubella vaccine, which is typically given to children.
While many people are infected with these viruses or receive the rubella vaccine, only a few people develop arthritis. No risk factors are known.
Symptoms
The main symptoms are
joint pain
and swelling of one or more joints.
Exams and Tests
physical examination
shows
joint inflammation
. A blood test for viruses may be performed. In some cases, a small amount of fluid may be removed from the affected joint to determine the cause of the inflammation.
Treatment
Your health care provider may prescribe pain medicines to relieve discomfort. You may also be prescribed anti-inflammatory medicines.
If joint inflammation is severe,
aspiration
of fluid from the affected joint may relieve pain.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome is usually good. Most viral arthritis disappears within several days or weeks when the virus-related disease goes away.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider for an appointment if arthritis symptoms last longer than a few weeks.
Alternative Names
Infectious arthritis - viral
Images
The structure of a joint
Shoulder joint inflammation
References
Gasque P, Guillot X. Viral arthritis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, Koretzky GA, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds.
Firestein and Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 121.
Ohl CA. Infectious arthritis of native joints. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 103.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Infectious Arthritis