Industrial bronchitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Industrial bronchitis
Industrial bronchitis
Industrial
bronchitis
is swelling (inflammation) of the large airways of the lungs that occurs in some people who work around certain dusts, fumes, smoke, or other substances.
Causes
Exposure to dusts, fumes, strong acids, and other chemicals in the air causes this type of bronchitis. Smoking may also contribute.
You may be at risk if you are exposed to dusts that contain:
Asbestos
Coal
Cotton
Flax
Latex
Metals
Silica
Talc
Toluene diisocyanate
Western red cedar
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Cough that brings up mucus (sputum)
Shortness of breath
Wheezing
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will listen to your lungs using a stethoscope. Wheezing sounds or crackles may be heard.
Tests that may be ordered include:
Chest CT scan
Chest x-ray
Pulmonary function tests
(to measure breathing capacity and how well the lungs are functioning)
Pulse oximetry or
arterial blood gases
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to reduce the irritation.
Getting more air into the workplace or wearing masks to filter out the offending dust particles may help. Some people may need to be taken out of the workplace.
Some cases of industrial bronchitis go away without treatment. Other times, a person may need inhaled anti-inflammatory medicines. If you are at risk or have experienced this problem and you smoke,
stop smoking
.
Helpful measures include:
Breathing humidified air
Increasing fluid intake
Resting
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome is often good as long as you can stop being exposed to the irritant.
Possible Complications
Continued exposure to irritating gases, fumes, or other substances can lead to permanent lung damage.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you are regularly exposed to dusts, fumes, strong acids, or other chemicals that can affect the lungs and you develop symptoms of bronchitis.
Prevention
Regulate dust in industrial settings by wearing face masks and protective clothing, and by treating textiles. Stop smoking if you are at risk.
Get an early screening by your provider if you are exposed to chemicals that can cause this condition.
If you think a chemical you work with is affecting your breathing, ask your employer for a copy of the Material Safety Data Sheet. Bring it with you to your provider.
Alternative Names
Occupational bronchitis
Images
Bronchitis
Lung anatomy
Bronchitis and normal condition in tertiary bronchus
Respiratory system
References
Lemiere C, Vandenplas O. Occupational allergy and asthma. In: Burks AW, Holgate ST, O'Hehir RE, et al, eds.
Middleton's Allergy: Principles and Practice
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 56.
Tarlo SM, Redlich CA. Occupational lung disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 81.
Review Date 10/16/2024
Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Acute Bronchitis
Interstitial Lung Diseases
Occupational Health