Propoxyphene overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Propoxyphene overdose
Propoxyphene overdose
Propoxyphene is a medicine used to relieve pain. It is one of a number of chemicals called opioids or opiates, which were originally derived from the poppy plant and used for pain relief or their calming effects Propoxyphene overdose occurs when someone takes too much of this medicine.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) took this drug off the market in the United States in December 2010 because of the potential to cause deadly heart disturbances.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual
overdose
. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Propoxyphene
Where Found
Brand names include:
Darvocet
Darvon
Darvon-N
Dolene
Note: This list may not be all inclusive.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Eyes, ears, nose, and throat:
Hearing loss
Pinpoint pupils
Heart and blood vessels:
Heart rhythm disturbances
Low blood pressure
Weak pulse
Lungs:
Breathing slow, labored
, or shallow
No breathing
Muscles:
Muscle spasticity
Muscle damage from being immobile while in a coma
Nervous system:
Lack of responsiveness (
coma
)
Confusion
Drowsiness
Seizures
Skin:
Blue fingernails or lips (
Cyanosis
)
Yellow skin color (jaundice)
Rash
Stomach and intestines:
Nausea, vomiting
Spasms of the stomach or intestines (
abdominal cramps
)
Propoxyphene is a weak opioid. It may cause opioid withdrawal symptoms in people who use it as a substitute for stronger formulations. Symptoms of withdrawal may include:
Anxiety and restlessness
Diarrhea
Goose bumps
Rapid heart rate
Vomiting
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional.
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
For more information about America's Poison Centers, go to
poisoncenters.org
.
If you go to the emergency room, take the container with you, if possible.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Symptoms will be treated as appropriate.
The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine)
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan
ECG (
electrocardiogram
, or heart tracing)
Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV)
Laxative
Medicines to treat symptoms, including naloxone, an antidote to reverse the effects of the overdose; many doses may be needed
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well the person does depends on the severity of the overdose and how quickly treatment is received. If the proper narcotic antagonist (medicine to counteract the effects of narcotics) can be given, recovery from an
acute
overdose occurs within 24 to 48 hours. However, if there has been prolonged coma and shock (damage to multiple internal organs), a more serious outcome is possible.
Alternative Names
Propoxyphene hydrochloride; Dextropropoxyphene
References
Aronson JK. Dextropropoxyphene. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:906-908.
Bluth MH, Pincus MR, Abraham NZ. Toxicology and therapeutic drug monitoring. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 24.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Nikolaides JK, Thompson TM. Opioids. In: Walls RM, eds.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 151.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pain Relievers