Hyphema: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hyphema
Hyphema
Hyphema is blood in the front area (anterior chamber) of the eye. The blood collects behind the cornea and in front of the iris.
Causes
Hyphema is most often caused by trauma to the eye. Other causes of bleeding in the front chamber of the eye include:
Blood vessel abnormality
Cancer of the eye
Severe inflammation of the
iris
Advanced
diabetes
Blood disorders such as
sickle cell anemia
Symptoms
Symptoms include:
Bleeding in the anterior chamber of the eye
Eye pain
Light sensitivity
Vision abnormalities
You may not be able to see a small hyphema when looking at your eye in the mirror. With a total hyphema, the collection of blood will block the view of the iris and pupil.
Exams and Tests
You may need the following tests and exams:
Eye exam
Intraocular pressure measurement (
tonometry
)
Ultrasound
testing
Treatment
Treatment may not be needed in mild cases. The blood is absorbed in a few days.
The outcome of the condition will likely be much worse if bleeding comes back or worsens, especially within 3 to 5 days. The health care provider may recommend the following to cut down the chance that there will be more bleeding:
Bed rest
Eye patching
Sedating medicines
You may need to use eye drops to decrease the inflammation or lower the pressure in your eye.
An eye doctor may need to remove the blood surgically, especially if pressure in the eye is very high or the blood is slow to absorb again. You may need to stay in a hospital.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome depends upon the amount of injury to the eye. People with
sickle cell disease
are more likely to have eye complications and must be watched closely. People with diabetes will probably need laser treatment for the problem.
Severe vision loss can occur.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Acute glaucoma
Impaired vision
Recurring bleeding
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you notice blood in the front of the eye or if you have an eye injury. You will need to be examined and treated by an eye doctor right away, especially if you have decreased vision.
Prevention
Many eye injuries can be prevented by wearing safety goggles or other protective eye wear. Always wear eye protection while playing sports, such as racquetball, or contact sports, such as basketball.
Images
Eye
References
Lin TKY, Tingey DP, Shingleton BJ. Glaucoma associated with ocular trauma. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds.
Ophthalmology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 10.16.
Olitsky SE, Marsh JD. Injuries to the eye. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 675.
Patel S, Kim SJ, Sternberg P. Surgery for ocular trauma: principles and techniques of treatment. In: Sadda SVR, Sarraf D, Freund B, et al, eds.
Ryan's Retina
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 113.
Review Date 10/2/2024
Updated by: Audrey Tai, DO, MS, Athena Eye Care, Mission Viejo, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Eye Injuries