Myelodysplastic syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Myelodysplastic syndrome is a group of disorders in which the blood cells produced in the bone marrow do not mature into healthy cells. This leaves you with fewer healthy blood cells in your body. The blood cells that have matured may not function properly.
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a form of cancer. In about a third of people, MDS may develop into
acute myeloid leukemia
(AML).
Causes
Stem cells in bone marrow form different types of blood cells. With MDS, the DNA in stem cells becomes damaged. Because the DNA is damaged, the stem cells cannot produce healthy blood cells.
The exact cause of MDS is not known. For most cases, there is no known cause.
Risk factors for MDS include:
Certain genetic disorders
Exposure to environmental or industrial chemicals, fertilizers, pesticides, solvents, or heavy metals
Smoking
Prior cancer treatment increases the risk for MDS. This is called secondary or treatment-related MDS.
Certain chemotherapy medicines increase the chance of developing MDS. This is a major risk factor.
Radiation therapy, when used with chemotherapy, increases the risk for MDS even more.
People who have stem cell transplants may develop MDS because they also receive high doses of chemotherapy.
MDS usually occurs in adults age 60 years and older. It is more common in men.
Watch this video about:
Red blood cell production
Symptoms
Early stage MDS often has no symptoms. MDS is often discovered during other blood tests.
People with very low blood counts often experience symptoms. Symptoms depend on the type of blood cell affected, and they include:
Weakness or tiredness due to anemia
Shortness of breath
Easy bruising and bleeding
Small red or purple pinpoint dots under the skin caused by bleeding
Frequent infections and fever
Exams and Tests
People with MDS have a shortage of blood cells. MDS may reduce the number of one or more of these:
Red blood cells
White blood cells
Platelets
The shapes of these cells may also be changed. Your health care provider will perform a
complete blood count
and
blood smear
to find which type of blood cells have been affected.
Other tests that may be performed are:
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy
.
Cytochemistry, flow cytometry, immunocytochemistry, and immunophenotyping tests are used to identify and classify specific types of MDS.
Cytogenetics and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) are used for genetic analysis. Cytogenetic testing can detect translocations and other genetic abnormalities. FISH is used to identify specific changes within chromosomes. Genetic variations identified by next generation sequencing may help determine the response to treatment.
Some of these tests will help your provider determine what type of MDS you have. This will help your provider plan your treatment.
Your provider may define your MDS as high-risk, intermediate-risk, or low-risk on the basis of:
The severity of shortage of blood cells in your body
The types of changes in your DNA
The number of immature white blood cells in your bone marrow
Since there is a risk of MDS developing into AML, regular follow-up with your provider may be required.
Treatment
Your treatment will depend on several factors:
Whether you are low-risk or high-risk
The type of MDS you have
Your age, health, and other conditions you may have, such as diabetes or heart disease
The goal of MDS treatment is to prevent leukemia from developing and to prevent problems due to a shortage of blood cells, infections and bleeding. It may consist of:
Blood transfusion
Medicines that promote the production of blood cells
Medicines that suppress the immune system
Low-dose
chemotherapy
to improve blood cell counts
Stem cell transplantation
Your provider may try one or more treatments to see what your MDS responds to.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook will depend on your type of MDS and severity of symptoms. Your overall health also may affect your chances of recovery. Many people have stable MDS that does not progress into cancer for years, if ever.
Some people with MDS may develop AML.
Possible Complications
MDS complications include:
Bleeding
Infections such as
pneumonia
, gastrointestinal infections, urinary infections
AML
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you:
Feel weak and tired most of the time
Bruise or bleed easily, have bleeding of the gums or frequent nosebleeds
You notice red or purple spots of bleeding under the skin
Alternative Names
Myeloid malignancy; Myelodysplastic syndrome; MDS; Preleukemia; Smoldering leukemia; Refractory anemia; Refractory cytopenia
Images
Bone marrow aspiration
References
National Cancer Institute website. Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms treatment (PDQ) - health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/myeloproliferative/hp/mds-mpd-treatment-pdq
. Updated January 26, 2022. Accessed March 19, 2024.
Nguyen PL, Hasserjian RP. Myelodysplastic syndromes. In: Hsi ED, ed.
Hematopathology: Foundations of Diagnostic Pathology
. 3rd ed. Philadelphia PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 18.
Stone RM. Myelodysplastic syndromes. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 167.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Myelodysplastic Syndromes