Alpha fetoprotein: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Alpha fetoprotein
Alpha fetoprotein
Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) is a protein produced by the liver and yolk sac of a developing baby during pregnancy. AFP levels go down soon after birth. It is likely that AFP has no normal function in adults.
A test can be done to measure the amount of AFP in your blood.
How the Test is Performed
A blood sample is needed. Most of the time, blood is typically
drawn from a vein
located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.
How to Prepare for the Test
You do not need to take any special steps to prepare.
How the Test will Feel
You may feel slight pain or a sting when the needle is inserted. You may also feel some throbbing at the site after the blood is drawn.
Why the Test is Performed
Your health care provider may order this test to:
Screen for problems in the baby during pregnancy. (The test is done as part of a larger set of blood tests called
quadruple screen
.)
Diagnose certain liver disorders.
Screen for and monitor some cancers.
Normal Results
The normal values in males or nonpregnant females is generally less than 40 micrograms/liter.
The examples above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Greater than normal levels of AFP may be due to:
Cancer
in
testes
, ovaries, biliary (liver secretion) tract, stomach, or pancreas
Cirrhosis of the liver
Liver cancer
Malignant teratoma
Recovery from hepatitis
Problems during pregnancy
Alternative Names
Fetal alpha globulin; AFP
Images
Blood test
Alpha fetoprotein - series
References
Driscoll DA, Simpson JL. Genetic screening and diagnosis. In: Landon MB, Galan HL, Jauniaux ERM, et al, eds.
Gabbe's Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 10.
Dugoff L, Wapner RJ. Prenatal diagnosis of congenital disorders. In: Lockwood CJ, Copel JA, Dugoff L et al, eds.
Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 30.
Lee E. Neonatology. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds. The Harriet Lane Handbook. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 18.
Lee P, Jain S, Pincus MR, et al. Diagnosis and management of cancer using serologic and other body fluid markers. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 76.
Review Date 8/23/2023
Updated by: LaQuita Martinez, MD, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Emory Johns Creek Hospital, Alpharetta, GA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Birth Defects
Cirrhosis
Hepatitis
Liver Cancer
Neural Tube Defects
Ovarian Cancer
Prenatal Testing
Spina Bifida
Testicular Cancer