Thoracic spine CT scan: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Thoracic spine CT scan
Thoracic spine CT scan
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the thoracic spine is an imaging method. It uses x-rays to rapidly create detailed pictures of the middle back (thoracic spine).
How the Test is Performed
You will lie on a narrow table that slides into the center of the CT scanner.
Once you are inside the scanner, the machine's x-ray beam rotates around you. Modern "spiral" scanners can perform the exam without stopping as your body moves through the scanner in small increments.
A computer creates separate images of the body area. These are called slices. These images can be stored, viewed on a monitor, or printed on film. The slices together can create three-dimensional models of the body area.
You must be still during the exam. Movement will create blurred images. You may be told to hold your breath for short periods of time.
The scan should take only 10 to 15 minutes.
How to Prepare for the Test
Certain exams require a special dye, called contrast. Contrast is delivered into the body before the test starts. This helps certain areas show up better on the x-rays.
Contrast can be given in several ways. It may be given as an injection through:
A vein (IV) in your hand or forearm
Your back into the space surrounding the spinal cord
A joint if one is under investigation
If contrast is used, you may also be asked not to eat or drink anything for 4 to 6 hours before the test.
Before receiving the contrast, tell your health care provider if:
You have ever had a reaction to contrast. You may need to take medicines before the test to safely receive the dye.
You take the diabetes medicine metformin (Glucophage). You may need to take extra steps if you take this medicine.
Find out if the CT machine has a weight limit if you weigh more than 450 pounds (200 kilograms). Too much weight can cause damage to the scanner.
You will be asked to remove jewelry and wear a hospital gown during the study.
How the Test will Feel
Some people may find it uncomfortable to lie on the hard table.
Contrast given through an IV may cause:
Slight burning feeling
Metallic taste in the mouth
Warm flushing of the body
These feelings are normal and will often go away within a few seconds.
Why the Test is Performed
CT rapidly creates detailed pictures of the thoracic spine. The test may help diagnose or detect:
Birth defects of the spine in children
Bone fracture in the spine
Arthritis of the spine
Curvature of the spine called scoliosis
Tumor of the spine
Other spinal injury
Thoracic CT scan can also be used during or after:
Myelography: An x-ray of the spinal cord and spinal nerve roots with contrast in the space around the spinal cord
Discography: An x-ray of the disk
Normal Results
Results are normal if the thoracic spine looks normal.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may be due to:
Birth defects of the spine
Bone problems
Fracture
Herniated (slipped) disk
Infection of the spine
Narrowing of the spine (
spinal stenosis
)
Scoliosis
Tumor
Risks
Risks of CT scans include:
Exposure to radiation
Allergic reaction to contrast dye
CT scans expose you to more radiation than regular x-rays. Having many x-rays or CT scans over time may increase your risk for cancer. However, the risk from any one scan is small. You and your provider should weigh this risk against the benefits of getting a correct diagnosis for a medical problem.
Some people have allergies to contrast dye.
The most common type of contrast given into a vein contains iodine. People with an iodine allergy may have:
Nausea or vomiting
Sneezing
Itching
or
hives
In case you are allergic, your provider may give you antihistamines (such as Benadryl) or steroids before the test.
The kidneys help remove the dye from the body. People with kidney disease or diabetes may need to receive extra fluids after the test. This will help flush the dye out of the body. Be sure to tell your provider if you have any kidney problems.
Rarely, the dye may cause
anaphylaxis
. Notify the scanner operator right away if you have any trouble breathing or swallowing. Scanners come with an intercom and speakers, so the operator can hear you at all times.
Considerations
The thoracic CT scan is good for evaluating large herniated disks. It can miss the smaller ones. This test with a myelogram will show a better image of the nerve roots and find smaller injuries or abnormalities.
Alternative Names
CAT scan - thoracic spine; Computed axial tomography scan - thoracic spine; Computed tomography scan - thoracic spine; CT scan - upper back
References
Rankine JJ. Spinal trauma. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.
Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 52.
US Food and Drug Administration website. Computed tomography (CT).
www.fda.gov/radiation-emitting-products/medical-x-ray-imaging/computed-tomography-ct
. Updated January 5, 2023. Accessed July 9, 2024.
Williams KD. Fractures, dislocations, and fracture-dislocations of the spine. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, eds.
Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 41.
Review Date 6/17/2024
Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
CT Scans
Spinal Cord Injuries
Spine Injuries and Disorders