Absent menstrual periods - secondary: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Absent menstrual periods - secondary
Absent menstrual periods - secondary
Absence of a woman's monthly menstrual period is called amenorrhea. Secondary amenorrhea is when a woman who has been having normal menstrual cycles stops getting her periods for 6 months or longer.
Causes
Secondary amenorrhea can occur due to natural changes in the body. For example, the most common cause of secondary amenorrhea is pregnancy. Breastfeeding and menopause are also common, but natural causes.
Women who take birth control pills or who receive hormone shots such as Depo-Provera may not have any monthly bleeding. When they stop taking these hormones, their periods may not return for more than 6 months.
You are more likely to have absent periods if you:
Are obese
Exercise too much and for long periods of time
Have low body fat (less than 15% to 17%)
Have severe anxiety or emotional distress
Lose a lot of weight suddenly (for example, from strict or extreme diets or after
gastric bypass surgery
)
Other causes include:
Drugs for cancer treatment
Medicines to treat
schizophrenia
or psychosis
Overactive thyroid gland
Pituitary tumors
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Reduced function of the ovaries
Premature ovarian failure
Also, procedures such as a dilation and curettage (
D and C
) can cause scar tissue to form. This tissue may cause a woman to stop menstruating. This is called
Asherman syndrome
. Scarring may also be caused by some severe pelvic infections.
Symptoms
In addition to having no menstrual periods, other symptoms can include:
Breast size changes
Weight gain
or
weight loss
Discharge from the breast or change in breast size
Acne and increased hair growth in a male pattern
Vaginal dryness
Voice changes
If amenorrhea is caused by a pituitary tumor, there may be other symptoms related to the tumor, such as vision loss and
headache
.
Exams and Tests
A physical exam and pelvic exam must be done to check for pregnancy. A
pregnancy test
will be done.
Blood tests may be done to check hormone levels, including:
Estradiol levels
Follicle stimulating hormone
(FSH level)
Luteinizing hormone
(LH level)
Prolactin level
Testosterone
level
Thyroid stimulating hormone
(TSH)
Other tests that may be performed include:
CT scan
or
MRI scan of the head
to look for tumors
Biopsy of the lining of the uterus
Genetic testing
Ultrasound of the pelvis or
hysterosonogram
(pelvic ultrasound that involves putting saline solution inside the uterus)
Treatment
Treatment depends on the cause of amenorrhea. Normal monthly periods  most often  return after the condition is treated.
A lack of menstrual period due to
obesity
, vigorous exercise, or weight loss may respond to a change in exercise routine or weight control (gain or loss, as needed).
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the cause of amenorrhea. Many of the conditions that cause secondary amenorrhea will respond to treatment.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
See your primary health care provider or women's health care provider if you have missed more than one period so you can get diagnosed and treated, if needed.
Alternative Names
Amenorrhea - secondary; No periods - secondary; Absent periods - secondary; Absent menses - secondary; Absence of periods - secondary
Images
Secondary amenorrhea
Normal uterine anatomy (cut section)
Absence of menstruation (amenorrhea)
References
Bulun SE. Physiology and pathology of the female reproductive axis. In Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Koenig RJ, et al.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 17.
Cameron S. Menstruation and amenorrhoea. In: Magowan B, ed.
Clinical Obstetrics and Gynaecology
. 5th ed. Elsevier; 2023:chap 4.
Lobo RA. Primary and secondary amenorrhea and precocious puberty. In: Gershenson DM, Lentz GM, Valea FA, Lobo RA, eds.
Comprehensive Gynecology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 36.
Review Date 4/16/2024
Updated by: John D. Jacobson, MD, Professor Emeritus, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Menstruation