Leukoplakia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Leukoplakia
Leukoplakia
Leukoplakia are white patches on the tongue, in the mouth, or on the inside of the cheek.
Causes
Leukoplakia affects the mucous membranes of the mouth. The exact cause is not known. It may be due to irritation such as:
Rough teeth
Rough places on dentures, fillings, and crowns
Smoking or other tobacco use (smoker's keratosis), especially pipes
Holding chewing tobacco or snuff in the mouth for a long period of time
Drinking a lot of alcohol
The disorder is more common in older adults.
A type of leukoplakia of the mouth, called oral hairy leukoplakia, is caused by the Epstein-Barr virus. It is seen mostly in people with HIV/AIDS. It may be one of the first signs of HIV infection. Oral hairy leukoplakia can also appear in other people whose immune system is not working well, such as after a
bone marrow transplant
.
Symptoms
Patches in the mouth usually develop on the tongue (sides of the tongue with oral hairy leukoplakia) and on the insides of the cheeks.
Leukoplakia patches are:
Most often white or gray
Uneven in shape
Fuzzy (oral hairy leukoplakia)
Slightly raised, with a hard surface
Unable to be scraped off
Painful when the mouth patches come into contact with acidic or spicy food
Exams and Tests
biopsy
of the lesion confirms the diagnosis. Examination of the biopsy may find changes that indicate
oral cancer
.
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to get rid of the leukoplakia patch. Removing the source of irritation may cause the patch to disappear.
Treat dental causes such as rough teeth, irregular denture surface, or fillings as soon as possible.
Stop smoking or using other tobacco products.
Do not drink alcohol.
If removing the source of the irritation does not work, your health care provider may suggest applying medicine to the patch or using surgery to remove it.
For oral hairy leukoplakia, taking antiviral medicine usually causes the patch to disappear. Your provider may also suggest applying medicine to the patch.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Leukoplakia is usually harmless. Patches in the mouth often clear up in a few weeks or months after the source of irritation is removed.
In some cases, the patches may be an early sign of cancer.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider for an appointment if you have any patches that look like leukoplakia or hairy leukoplakia.
Prevention
Stop smoking and do not use other tobacco products. Do not drink alcohol, or reduce the number of drinks you have that contain alcohol. Have rough teeth treated and dental appliances repaired.
Alternative Names
Hairy leukoplakia; Smoker's keratosis
References
Dinulos JGH. Premalignant and malignant nonmelanoma skin tumors. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 21.
James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Disorders of the mucous membranes. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin
. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 34.
Sciubba JJ. Oral mucosal lesions. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 87.
Review Date 8/26/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Mouth Disorders
Oral Cancer
Tongue Disorders