Hyperactivity and sugar: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hyperactivity and sugar
Hyperactivity and sugar
Hyperactivity means an increase in movement, often accompanied by impulsive actions, being easily distracted, and
shorter attention span
. Some people believe that children are more likely to be
hyperactive
if they eat sugar, artificial sweeteners, or certain food colorings. Other experts disagree with this.
Side Effects
Some people claim that eating sugar (such as sucrose), aspartame, and artificial flavors and colors lead to hyperactivity and other behavior problems in children. They argue that children should follow a diet that limits these substances.
Activity levels in children vary with their age. A 2-year old is most often more active, and has a shorter attention span, than a 10-year old.
A child's attention level also will vary depending on his or her interest in an activity. Adults may view the child's level of activity differently depending on the situation. For example, an active child at the playground may be OK. However, a lot of activity late at night may be viewed as a problem.
In some cases, a special diet of foods without artificial flavors or colors helps with a child's hyperactivity, because the family and the child interact in a different way when the child eliminates these foods. These changes, not the diet itself, may improve the behavior and activity level.
Refined (processed) sugars may have some effect on children's activity. Refined sugars and carbohydrates enter the bloodstream quickly. Therefore, they cause rapid changes in blood sugar levels. This may make a child become more active.
Several studies have shown a link between artificial colorings and hyperactivity. On the other hand, other studies do not show any effect. This issue is yet to be decided.
Recommendations
There are many reasons to limit the sugar a child has other than the effect on activity level.
A diet high in sugar is a major cause of tooth decay.
High-sugar foods tend to have fewer vitamins and minerals. These foods may replace foods with more nutrition. High-sugar foods also have extra calories that can lead to obesity.
Some people have
allergies
to dyes and flavors. If a child has a diagnosed allergy, talk to your child's health care provider or a dietitian.
Add fiber to your child's diet to keep blood sugar levels more even. For breakfast, fiber is found in oatmeal, shredded wheat, berries, bananas, whole-grain pancakes. For lunch, fiber is found in whole-grain breads, peaches, grapes, and other fresh fruits.
Provide "quiet time" so that children can learn to calm themselves at home.
Talk to your provider if your child cannot sit still when other children of his or her age can, or cannot control impulses.
Alternative Names
Diet - hyperactivity
References
Harstad EB. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 50.
Jain P, Newmark S. Attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. In: Rakel D, Minichiello VJ, ed.
Integrative Medicine
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 8.
Katzinger J, Murray MT, Lyon MR. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. In: Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, eds.
Textbook of Natural Medicine
. 5th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2021:chap 151.
Review Date 4/5/2025
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
Carbohydrates