Bronchiolitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Bronchiolitis
Bronchiolitis
Bronchiolitis is swelling and mucus buildup in the smallest air passages in the lungs (bronchioles). It is usually due to a viral infection.
Causes
Bronchiolitis usually affects children under the age of 2, with a peak age of 3 to 6 months. It is a common, and sometimes severe illness.
Respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) is the most common cause. More than half of all infants are exposed to this virus by their first birthday.
Other viruses that can cause bronchiolitis include:
Adenovirus
Influenza
Parainfluenza
The virus is spread to infants by coming into direct contact with nose and throat fluids of someone who has the illness. This can happen when another child or an adult who has a virus:
Sneezes or coughs nearby and tiny droplets in the air are then breathed in by the infant
Touches toys or other objects that are then touched by the infant
Bronchiolitis occurs more often in the fall and winter than other times of the year. It is a very common reason for infants to be hospitalized during winter and early spring.
Risk factors of bronchiolitis include:
Being around cigarette smoke
Being younger than 6 months old
Living in crowded conditions
Not being breastfed
Being born before 37 weeks of pregnancy
Symptoms
Some children have few or mild symptoms.
Bronchiolitis begins as a mild upper respiratory infection. Within 2 to 3 days, the child develops more breathing problems, including
wheezing
and a cough.
Symptoms include:
Bluish skin
due to lack of oxygen (cyanosis) - emergency treatment is needed
Breathing difficulty including wheezing and shortness of breath
Cough
Fatigue
Fever
Muscles around the ribs sink in as the child tries to breathe in (called
intercostal retractions
)
Infant's nostrils get wide when breathing
Rapid breathing (tachypnea)
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Wheezing and crackling sounds may be heard through the stethoscope.
Most of the time, bronchiolitis can be diagnosed based on the symptoms and the exam.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood gases
Chest x-ray
Culture of a sample of nasal fluid to determine the virus causing the disease
Treatment
The main focus of treatment is to relieve symptoms, such as difficulty breathing and wheezing. Some children may need to stay in the hospital if their breathing problems do not improve after being observed in the clinic or emergency room.
Antibiotics do not work against viral infections. Medicines that treat viruses may be used to treat very ill children.
At home, measures to relieve symptoms
can be used. For example:
Have your child drink plenty of fluids. Breast milk or formula is fine for children younger than 12 months. Electrolyte drinks, such as Pedialyte, are also OK for infants.
Have your child breathe moist (wet) air to help loosen sticky mucus. Use a humidifier to moisten the air.
Give your child saline nose drops. Then use a nasal suction bulb to help relieve a stuffy nose.
Be sure your child gets plenty of rest.
Do not allow anyone to smoke in the house, car, or anywhere near your child. Children who are having trouble breathing may need to stay in the hospital. There, treatment may include oxygen therapy and fluids given through a vein (IV).
Outlook (Prognosis)
Breathing often gets better by the third day and symptoms mostly clear within a week. In rare cases,
pneumonia
or more severe breathing problems develop.
Some children may have problems with wheezing or asthma as they get older.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider right away or go to the emergency room if your child:
Becomes extremely tired
Has bluish color in the skin, nails, or lips
Starts breathing very fast
Has a cold that suddenly worsens
Has difficulty breathing
Has nostril flaring or chest retractions when trying to breathe
Prevention
Most cases of bronchiolitis cannot be prevented because the viruses that cause the infection are common in the environment. Careful hand washing, especially around infants, can help prevent the spread of viruses.
A medicine called palivizumab (Synagis) that boosts the immune system may be recommended for certain children. Your child's provider will let you know if this medicine is right for your child.
Alternative Names
Respiratory syncytial virus - bronchiolitis; Flu - bronchiolitis; Wheezing - bronchiolitis
Patient Instructions
Bronchiolitis - discharge
How to breathe when you are short of breath
Oxygen safety
Postural drainage
Using oxygen at home
Using oxygen at home - what to ask your doctor
Images
Bronchiolitis
Normal lungs and alveoli
References
House SA, Ralston SL. Wheezing, bronchiolitis, and bronchitis. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 418.
Ralston SL, Lieberthal AS; American Academy of Pediatrics, et al. Clinical practice guideline: the diagnosis, management, and prevention of bronchiolitis.
Pediatrics
. 2014;134(5):e1474-e1502. PMID: 25349312
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25349312/
.
Walsh EE, Englund JA. Respiratory syncytial virus. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 158.
Review Date 8/5/2023
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Acute Bronchitis
Bronchial Disorders