Achondrogenesis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Achondrogenesis
Achondrogenesis
Achondrogenesis is a rare type of
growth hormone deficiency
in which there is a defect in the development of bone and cartilage.
Causes
Achondrogenesis is inherited, which means it is passed down through families.
Some types are known to be recessive, meaning both parents carry the defective gene but are not affected by this condition. The chance for a subsequent child to be affected is 25%.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Very short trunk, arms, legs, and neck
Head appears large in relation to the trunk
Small lower jaw
Narrow chest
Exams and Tests
X-rays show bone problems associated with the condition.
Treatment
There is no current therapy. Talk to your health care provider about care decisions.
You may want to seek genetic counseling.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome is most often very poor. Many infants with achondrogenesis are
stillborn
or die shortly after birth because of
breathing problems
related to the abnormally small chest.
Possible Complications
This condition is often fatal early in life.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
This condition is often diagnosed on the first exam of an infant.
References
Grant LA, Griffin N. Congenital skeletal anomalies. In: Grant LA, Griffin N, eds.
Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology Essentials
. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 5.10.
Hecht JT, Horton WA, Rodriguez-Buritica D. Disorders involving ion transporters. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 717.
Review Date 8/5/2023
Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Connective Tissue Disorders
Dwarfism