Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC): MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a serious disorder in which the proteins that control blood clotting become overactive.
Causes
When you are injured, proteins in the blood that form blood clots travel to the injury site to help stop bleeding. If these proteins become abnormally active throughout the body, you could develop DIC. The underlying cause is usually due to inflammation, infection, or cancer.
In some cases of DIC, small
blood clots
form in the blood vessels. Some of these clots can clog the vessels and cut off the normal blood supply to organs such as the liver, brain, or kidneys. Lack of blood flow can damage and cause major injury to the organs.
In other cases of DIC, the clotting proteins in your blood are consumed. When this happens, you may have a high risk of serious bleeding, even from a minor injury or without injury. You may also have bleeding that starts spontaneously (on its own). The disease can also cause your healthy red blood cells to fragment and break up when they travel through the small vessels that are filled with clots.
Risk factors for DIC include:
Blood transfusion reaction
Cancer, especially certain types of
leukemia
Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis)
Infection in the blood, especially by bacteria or fungus
Liver disease
Pregnancy complications (such as placenta tissue that is left behind after delivery)
Recent surgery or anesthesia
Severe tissue injury (as in burns and head injury)
Large hemangioma (a blood vessel that is not formed properly)
Symptoms
Symptoms of DIC may include any of the following:
Bleeding, from many sites in the body
Blood clots
Bruising
Drop in blood pressure
Shortness of breath
Confusion, memory loss or change of behavior
Fever
Exams and Tests
You may have any of the following tests:
Complete blood count
with blood smear exam
Partial thromboplastin time
(PTT)
Prothrombin time
(PT)
Fibrinogen blood test
D-dimer
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for DIC. The goal is to determine and treat the underlying cause of DIC.
Supportive treatments may include:
Plasma transfusions to replace blood clotting factors if a large amount of bleeding is occurring.
Blood thinner medicine (heparin) to prevent blood clotting if a large amount of clotting is occurring.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outcome depends on what is causing the disorder. DIC can be life threatening.
Possible Complications
Complications from DIC may include:
Bleeding
Lack of blood flow to the arms, legs, or vital organs
Stroke
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Go to the emergency room or call 911 or the local emergency number if you have bleeding that does not stop.
Prevention
Get prompt treatment for conditions known to bring on this disorder.
Alternative Names
Consumption coagulopathy; DIC
Images
Blood clot formation
Meningococcemia on the calves
Blood clots
References
Levi M. Disseminated intravascular coagulation. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 137.
Sarode R, Kessler CM. Coagulation and fibrinolysis. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.
24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 40.
Schafer AI. Disseminated intravascular coagulation and bleeding in liver failure. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine.
27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 161.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bleeding Disorders
Blood Clots