Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is a rare disorder in which faulty communication between nerves and muscles leads to
muscle weakness
.
Causes
LEMS is an
autoimmune disorder
. This means your immune system mistakenly targets healthy cells and tissues in the body. With LEMS,
antibodies
produced by the immune system attack nerve cells. This makes nerves cells unable to release enough of a chemical called acetylcholine. This chemical transmits impulses between nerves and muscles. The result is muscle weakness.
LEMS may occur with cancers such as
small cell lung cancer
or autoimmune disorders such as
vitiligo
, which leads to a loss of skin pigment.
LEMS affects men more often than women. The most common age of occurrence is around age 60 years. LEMS is rare in children.
Symptoms
Weakness
or loss of movement that can be more or less severe, including:
Difficulty climbing stairs, walking, or lifting things
Muscle pain
Drooping of the head
The need to use the hands to get up from a sitting or lying position
Problems talking
Problems chewing or swallowing, which may include gagging or
choking
Vision changes, such as
blurry vision
, double vision, and problem keeping a steady gaze
Weakness is generally mild in LEMS. Leg muscles are mostly affected. Weakness may improve after exercise, but continuous exertion causes fatigue in some cases.
Symptoms related to the other parts of the nervous system often occur, and may include:
Blood pressure changes
Dizziness
upon standing
Dry mouth
Erectile dysfunction
Dry eyes
Constipation
Decreased sweating
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. The exam may show:
Decreased reflexes
Possible loss of muscle tissue
Weakness or paralysis that gets slightly better with activity
Tests to help diagnose and confirm LEMS may include:
Blood tests to look for the antibodies that attack the nerves
Electromyography
(EMG) to test the health of the muscle fibers
Nerve conduction velocity
(NCV) to test the speed of electrical activity along nerves
CT scan
and an
MRI
of the chest and the abdomen, followed by bronchoscopy for smokers may be done to evaluate for cancer.
PET scan
may also be done if a lung tumor is suspected. You may be referred to an oncologist (cancer specialist) to determine if other cancer testing is needed.
Treatment
The main goals of treatment are to:
Identify and treat any underlying disorders, such as lung cancer
Give treatment to help with the weakness
Plasma exchange, or plasmapheresis, is a treatment that helps remove from the body any harmful proteins (antibodies) that are interfering with nerve function. This involves removing blood plasma that contains the antibodies. Other proteins (such as albumin) or donated plasma are then infused into the body.
Another procedure involves using intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) to infuse a large amount of helpful antibodies directly into the bloodstream.
Medicines that may also be tried include:
Medicines that suppress the
immune system's response
Anticholinesterase medicines to improve muscle tone (although these are not very effective when given alone)
Medicines that increase the release of acetylcholine from nerve cells
Outlook (Prognosis)
Symptoms of LEMS may improve by treating the underlying disease, suppressing the immune system, or removing the antibodies. However, paraneoplastic LEMS may not respond as well to treatment. (Paraneoplastic LEMS symptoms are due to an altered immune system response to a tumor). Death is due to underlying malignancy.
Possible Complications
Complications of LEMS may include:
Difficulty breathing, including
respiratory failure
(less common)
Difficulty swallowing
Infections, such as
pneumonia
Injuries from falls and problems with coordination
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if symptoms of LEMS develop.
Alternative Names
Myasthenic syndrome; Eaton-Lambert syndrome; Lambert-Eaton syndrome; LES
Images
Superficial anterior muscles
References
Guptill JT, Sanders DB. Disorders of neuromuscular transmission. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 108.
Kaminski HJ. Disorders of neuromuscular transmission. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 390.
Moss HE. Eyelid and facial nerve disorders. In: Liu GT, Volpe NJ, Galetta SL, eds.
Liu, Volpe, and Galetta's Neuro-Ophthalmology
. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 14.
Review Date 6/13/2024
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Autoimmune Diseases
Neuromuscular Disorders