Aortic angiography: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Aortic angiography
Aortic angiography
Aortic angiography is a procedure that uses a special dye and x-rays to see how blood flows through the aorta. The aorta is the large artery that carries blood from your heart to your belly, pelvis, and legs.
Angiography uses
x-rays
and a special dye to see the insides of the arteries. Arteries are blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart.
How the Test is Performed
This test is done at a hospital or specialized procedure unit. Before the test starts, you will be given a mild sedative to help you relax.
An area of your body, most often in your arm or groin area, is cleaned and numbed with a local numbing medicine (anesthetic).
A radiologist or cardiologist will place a needle into the groin blood vessel. A guidewire and a long tube (catheter) will be passed through this needle.
The catheter is moved into the aorta. The doctor can see live images of the aorta on a TV-like monitor. X-rays are used to guide the catheter to the correct position.
Once the catheter is in place, dye is injected into it. X-ray images are taken to see how the dye moves through the aorta. The dye helps detect any blockages in blood flow.
After the x-rays or treatments are finished, the catheter is removed. Pressure is applied to the puncture site for 20 to 45 minutes to stop the bleeding. After that time, the area is checked and a tight bandage is applied. The leg is most often kept straight for another 6 hours after the procedure. You should avoid strenuous activity, such as heavy lifting, for 24 to 48 hours.
How to Prepare for the Test
You may be asked not to eat or drink anything for 6 to 8 hours before the test.
You will wear a hospital gown and sign a consent form for the procedure. Remove jewelry from the area being studied.
Tell your health care provider:
If you are pregnant
If you have ever had any allergic reactions to x-ray contrast material, shellfish, or iodine substances
If you are allergic to any medicines
Which medicines you are taking (including any herbal preparations)
If you have ever had any bleeding problems
You will be awake during the test. You may feel a sting as the numbing medicine is given and some pressure as the catheter is inserted. You may feel a warm flushing when the contrast dye flows through the catheter. This is normal and most often goes away in a few seconds.
You may have some discomfort from lying on the hospital table and staying still for a long time.
In most cases, you can resume normal activity the day after the procedure.
Why the Test is Performed
Your provider may ask for this test if there are signs or symptoms of a problem with the aorta or its branches, including:
Aortic aneurysm
Aortic dissection
Congenital (present from birth) problems
AV malformation
Double aortic arch
Coarctation of the aorta
Vascular ring
Injury to the aorta
Takayasu arteritis
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may be due to:
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Aortic dissection
Aortic regurgitation
Congenital (present from birth) problems
Double aortic arch
Coarctation of the aorta
Vascular ring
Injury to the aorta
Mesenteric artery disease or ischemia
Peripheral artery disease
Renal artery stenosis
Takayasu arteritis
Risks
Risks of aortic angiography include:
Allergic reaction to the contrast dye
Blockage of the artery
Blood clot that travels to the lungs
Bruising at the site of catheter insertion
Damage to the blood vessel where the needle and catheter are inserted
Excessive bleeding or a
blood clot
where the catheter is inserted, which can reduce blood flow to the leg
Heart attack or
stroke
Hematoma, a collection of blood at the site of the needle puncture
Infection
Injury to the nerves at the needle puncture site
Kidney damage from the dye
Considerations
This procedure may be done with
left heart catheterization
to look for coronary artery disease.
Aortic angiography has been mostly replaced by
computed tomography (CT) angiography
or
magnetic resonance (MR) angiography
.
Alternative Names
Angiography - aorta; Aortography; Abdominal aorta angiogram; Aortic arteriogram; Aneurysm - aortic arteriogram
Patient Instructions
Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open - discharge
Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular - discharge
Images
Cardiac arteriogram
References
Braverman AC, Schemerhorn M. Diseases of the aorta. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine.
12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 42.
Reekers JA. Angiography: principles, techniques and complications. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.
Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 78.
van den Bosch H, Westenberg JJM, de Roos A. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance angiography: carotids, aorta, and peripheral vessels. In: Manning WJ, Pennell DJ, eds.
Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 44.
Review Date 10/23/2024
Updated by: Deepak Sudheendra, MD, MHCI, RPVI, FSIR, Founder and CEO, 360 Vascular Institute, with an expertise in Vascular Interventional Radiology & Surgical Critical Care, Columbus, OH. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Heart Health Tests
Vasculitis
X-Rays