CBC blood test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
CBC blood test
CBC blood test
A complete blood count (CBC) test measures the following:
The number of white blood cells (
WBC count
)
The number of red blood cells (
RBC count
)
The number of platelets
The total amount of
hemoglobin
in the blood
The fraction of the blood composed of red blood cells (
hematocrit
)
The CBC test also provides information about the following measurements:
Mean red blood cell volume (MCV)
Mean
hemoglobin
amount per red blood cell (MCH)
The mean amount of hemoglobin relative to the size of the cell (hemoglobin concentration) per red blood cell (MCHC)
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
There is no special preparation needed.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, you may feel moderate pain. Some people feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
A CBC is a commonly performed lab test. It can be used to detect or monitor many different health conditions. Your health care provider may order this test:
If you are having symptoms, such as fatigue, weight loss, fever or other signs of an infection, weakness, bruising, bleeding, or any signs of cancer
When you are receiving treatments (medicines or radiation) that may change your blood count results
To monitor a long-term (chronic) health problem that may change your blood count results, such as chronic kidney disease
Normal Results
Blood counts may vary with altitude. In general, normal results are:
RBC count:
Male: 4.6 to 6.2 million cells/mcL
Female: 4.2 to 5.4 million cells/mcL
WBC count:
4,500 to 11,000 cells/mcL
Hematocrit:
Male: 40% to 55%
Female: 36% to 48%
Hemoglobin:
Male: 13 to 18 gm/dL
Female: 12 to 16 gm/dL
Red blood cell indices:
MCV: 80 to 100 femtoliter
MCH: 27 to 32 pg/cell
MCHC: 32 to 36 gm/dL
Platelet count:
150,000 to 400,000/dL
The examples above are common measurements for results of these tests. Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your doctor about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
High RBC, hemoglobin, or hematocrit may be due to:
A lack of enough water and fluids, such as from severe diarrhea, excessive sweating, or water pills used to treat high blood pressure
Kidney disease with high
erythropoietin
production
Low oxygen level in the blood for a long time, most often due to heart or lung disease, chronic carbon monoxide exposure, or living at a high altitude
Polycythemia vera
Smoking
Use of testosterone
Low RBC, hemoglobin, or hematocrit is a sign of anemia, which can result from:
Blood loss
(either sudden, or from problems such as heavy menstrual periods over a long time)
Bone marrow failure (for example, from radiation, infection, or tumor)
Breakdown of red blood cells (
hemolysis
)
Cancer and cancer treatment
Certain long-term (chronic) medical conditions, such as chronic kidney disease, ulcerative colitis, or rheumatoid arthritis
Iron deficiency
Leukemia
Long-term infections such as
hepatitis
Poor diet and nutrition, causing too little iron,
folate
,
vitamin B12
, or
vitamin B6
Multiple myeloma
A lower than normal white blood cell count is called leukopenia. A decreased WBC count may be due to:
Alcohol overuse and liver damage
Autoimmune diseases (such as
systemic lupus erythematosus
)
Bone marrow failure (for example, due to infection, tumor, radiation, or fibrosis)
Chemotherapy medicines used to treat cancer
Disease of the liver or spleen
Enlarged spleen
Infections caused by viruses, such as infectious mononucleosis or AIDS
Medicines
A high WBC count is called leukocytosis. It can result from:
Certain medicines, such as corticosteroids
Infections
Diseases such as lupus,
rheumatoid arthritis
, or
allergy
Leukemia
Severe emotional or physical stress
Tissue damage (such as from burns or a heart attack)
A high platelet count may be due to:
Bleeding
Diseases such as cancer or blood disease
Iron deficiency
Problems with the bone marrow
A low platelet count may be due to:
Disorders in which platelets are destroyed
Pregnancy
Enlarged spleen
Bone marrow failure (for example, due to infection, tumor, radiation, or fibrosis)
Chemotherapy medicines used to treat cancer
Risks
There is very little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another, and from one side of the body to the other. Taking blood from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Considerations
RBCs transport hemoglobin which, in turn, carries oxygen. The amount of oxygen received by body tissues depends on the amount and function of RBCs and hemoglobin.
WBCs are mediators of inflammation and the
immune response
. There are various types of WBCs that normally appear in the blood:
Neutrophils (polymorphonuclear leukocytes)
Band cells (slightly immature neutrophils)
T-type lymphocytes (T cells)
B-type lymphocytes (B cells)
Monocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
Alternative Names
Complete blood count; Anemia - CBC
Images
Complete blood count - series
Red blood cells, sickle cell
Megaloblastic anemia - view of red blood cells
Red blood cells, tear-drop shape
Red blood cells - normal
Red blood cells - elliptocytosis
Red blood cells - spherocytosis
Red blood cells - multiple sickle cells
Basophil (close-up)
Malaria, microscopic view of cellular parasites
Malaria, photomicrograph of cellular parasites
Red blood cells - sickle cells
Red blood cells - sickle and Pappenheimer
Red blood cells, target cells
Formed elements of blood
References
Lin JC, Benz, EJ Jr. Approach to anemia in the adult and child. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 35.
Means, RT Jr. Approach to the anemias. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine.
27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 144.
Vajpayee N, Graham SS, Bem S. Basic examination of blood and bone marrow. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.
24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 31.
Review Date 10/14/2024
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Blood Count Tests
Blood Disorders