Meningitis - cryptococcal: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Meningitis - cryptococcal
Meningitis - cryptococcal
Cryptococcal
meningitis
is a fungal infection of the tissues covering the brain and spinal cord. These tissues are called meninges.
Causes
In most cases, cryptococcal meningitis is caused by the fungus
Cryptococcus neoformans
. This fungus is found in soil around the world.
Cryptococcus gattii
can also cause meningitis, but this form can cause disease in people with a normal immune system as well.
This type of meningitis is not spread from person to person. Usually, it spreads through the bloodstream to the brain from another place in the body that has the initial infection.
Cryptococcus neoformans
meningitis most often affects people with a weakened immune system, including people with:
AIDS
Cirrhosis
(a type of liver disease)
Diabetes
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Sarcoidosis
An organ transplant
Cryptococcus
neoformans meningitis  is rare in people who have a normal immune system and no long-term health problems.
Symptoms
This form of meningitis starts slowly, over a few days to a few weeks. Symptoms may include:
Fever
Hallucinations
Headache
Mental status change
(confusion)
Nausea and vomiting
Sensitivity to light
Stiff neck
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms.
A lumbar puncture (
spinal tap
) is used to diagnose meningitis. In this test, a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is removed from the space around your spine and tested.
Other tests that may be done include:
Blood culture
Chest x-ray
Cryptococcal antigen in CSF or blood
CSF examination for cell count, glucose, and protein
CT scan of the head
Gram stain
, other special stains, and
culture of CSF
Treatment
Antifungal medicines are used to treat this form of meningitis.
Intravenous
(IV, through a vein) therapy with amphotericin B is the most common treatment. It is often combined with an oral antifungal medicine called 5-flucytosine.
Another oral medicine, fluconazole, may also be effective in high doses. If needed, it will be prescribed later in the disease course.
Outlook (Prognosis)
People who recover from cryptococcal meningitis need long-term medicine to prevent the infection from coming back. People with weakened immune systems, such as those with HIV/AIDS, will also need long-term treatment to improve their immune system.
Possible Complications
These complications may occur from this infection:
Brain damage
Hearing
or vision loss
Hydrocephalus
(excessive CSF in the brain)
Seizures
Death
Amphotericin B can have side effects such as:
Nausea and vomiting
Fever and chills
Joint and muscles aches
Kidney damage
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call 911 or the local emergency number if you develop any of the serious symptoms listed above. Meningitis can quickly become a life-threatening illness.
Call the local emergency number or go to an emergency room if you suspect meningitis in a young child who has these symptoms:
Feeding difficulties
High-pitched cry
Irritability
Persistent, unexplained fever
Alternative Names
Cryptococcal meningitis
Images
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Meningitis. About fugal meningitis.
www.cdc.gov/meningitis/about/fungal-meningitis.html
. Updated January 7, 2025. Accessed March 13, 2025.
Chen SC-A. Cryptococcosis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 309.
Perfect JR. Cryptococcosis (
Cryptococcus neoformans
and
Cryptococcus gattii
). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 262.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Meningitis