Parainfluenza: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Parainfluenza
Parainfluenza
Parainfluenza refers to a group of viruses that lead to upper and lower respiratory infections.
Causes
There are four types of parainfluenza virus. They can all cause lower or
upper respiratory infections
in adults and children. The virus can cause
croup
,
bronchiolitis
,
bronchitis
and certain types of
pneumonia
.
The exact number of parainfluenza cases is unknown. The number is suspected to be very high. Infections are most common in fall and winter. Parainfluenza infections are most severe in infants and become less severe with age. By school age, most children have been exposed to the parainfluenza virus. Most children and adults have antibodies against parainfluenza, although they can get repeat infections.
Symptoms
Symptoms vary depending on the type of infection. Cold-like symptoms consisting of a runny nose and mild cough are common. Life-threatening respiratory symptoms can be seen in young infants with bronchiolitis and those with weak immune system.
In general, symptoms may include:
Sore throat
Fever
Runny or stuffy nose
Chest pain, shortness of breath,
wheezing
Cough or
croup
Exams and Tests
A physical exam may show sinus tenderness, swollen glands, and a red throat. Your  health care provider will listen to the lungs and chest with a stethoscope. Abnormal sounds, such as crackling or wheezing, may be heard.
Tests that may be done include:
Arterial blood gases
Blood cultures
(to check for other causes of pneumonia)
Chest x-ray
CT scan of the chest
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Swab of nose for rapid viral test including the virus that causes
COVID-19
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for  parainfluenza  infection. Certain treatments are available for the symptoms of croup and bronchiolitis to make breathing easier.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most infections in adults and older children are mild and recovery takes place without treatment, unless the person is very old or has an abnormal immune system. Medical intervention may be necessary if
breathing difficulties
develop.
Possible Complications
Secondary bacterial infections are the most common complication. Airway obstruction in croup and bronchiolitis can be severe and even life threatening, especially in younger children.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You or your child develops croup, wheezing, or any other type of breathing difficulty.
A child under 18 months develops any type of upper respiratory symptom.
Prevention
There are no vaccines available for parainfluenza. A few preventive measures that may help include:
Avoid crowds to limit exposure during peak outbreaks.
Wash your hands often.
Limit exposure to day care centers and nurseries, if possible.
Alternative Names
Human parainfluenza virus; HPIVs
References
Ison MG. Parainfluenza viruses. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 156.
Weinberg GA, Edwards KM. Parainfluenza viral disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 331.
Welliver Sr RC. Parainfluenza viruses. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.
Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 179.
Review Date 8/19/2024
Updated by: Allen J. Blaivas, DO, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, VA New Jersey Health Care System, Clinical Assistant Professor, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, East Orange, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Croup
Viral Infections