Urine odor: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Urine odor
Urine odor
Urine odor refers to the smell from your urine. Urine odor varies. Most of the time, urine does not have a strong smell if you are healthy and drink plenty of fluids.
Causes
Most changes in urine odor are not a sign of disease and go away in time. Some foods and medicines, including vitamins, may affect your urine's odor. For example, eating asparagus causes a distinct urine odor.
Foul-smelling urine may be due to bacteria. Sweet-smelling urine may be a sign of uncontrolled diabetes or a rare disease of metabolism. Liver disease and certain metabolic disorders may cause musty-smelling urine.
Some conditions that can cause changes in urine odor include:
Bladder
fistula
Bladder infection
Body is low on fluids (concentrated urine can smell like ammonia)
Poorly controlled diabetes (sweet smelling urine)
Liver failure
Ketonuria
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have signs of a urinary tract infection with abnormal urine odor. These include:
Fever
Chills
Burning pain with urination
Back pain
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
You may have the following tests:
Urinalysis
Urine culture
References
Gharavi AG, Landry DW. Approach to the patient with renal disease. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 100.
Navarro D, Fonseca NM, Garigali G, Fogazzi GB. Urinalysis. In: Johnson RJ, Floege J, Tonelli M, eds.
Comprehensive Clinical Nephrology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 4.
Riley RS, McPherson RA. Basic examination of urine. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 29.
Review Date 7/8/2023
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Metabolic Disorders
Urinalysis
Urinary Tract Infections
Urine and Urination