Ketoprofen overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Ketoprofen overdose
Ketoprofen overdose
Ketoprofen is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). It is used to treat pain, swelling, and inflammation. Ketoprofen overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an
overdose
, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Ketoprofen can be harmful in large amounts.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of a ketoprofen overdose in different parts of the body.
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Blurred vision
Ringing in the ears
HEART AND BLOOD
Congestive heart failure
(chest discomfort, shortness of breath, leg swelling)
High blood pressure
or
low blood pressure
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Diarrhea
Nausea (common)
Possible bleeding from the stomach and intestines
Stomach pain
Vomiting (common, sometimes with blood)
LUNGS AND AIRWAYS
Difficulty breathing
Wheezing
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Headache
Agitation
Coma
(decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness) in severe overdoses
Confusion
Drowsiness
Dizziness (common)
Fatigue and weakness
Numbness and tingling
Seizures
(in severe overdoses)
Unsteadiness
SKIN
Blistering rash
Bruising
Sweating
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.  This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Chest x-ray
Endoscopy
-- camera placed down the throat to check for burns in the esophagus and stomach
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicine to treat stomach inflammation and bleeding, breathing problems, and other symptoms
Activated charcoal
Laxative
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach (
gastric lavage
)
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a breathing machine (
ventilator
)
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on the amount of ketoprofen that was swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
A mild overdose of ketoprofen does not usually cause serious problems. The person may have some stomach pain and vomiting (possibly with blood).
However, a large amount of internal bleeding is possible, and a blood transfusion may be needed. Passing a tube with a camera through the mouth into the stomach may be needed to stop the internal bleeding.
If kidney damage is severe, dialysis may be needed until kidney function returns. In some cases, the damage is permanent.
A large overdose can cause serious damage to children and adults. Death may occur.
References
Aronson JK. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:236-272.
Hatten BW. Aspirin and nonsteroidal agents. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 139.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pain Relievers