Syphilitic aseptic meningitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Syphilitic aseptic meningitis
Syphilitic aseptic meningitis
Syphilitic aseptic
meningitis
, or syphilitic meningitis, is a complication of untreated
syphilis
. It involves inflammation of the tissues covering the brain and spinal cord caused by this bacterial infection.  These tissues are called the meninges.
Causes
Syphilitic meningitis is a form of
neurosyphilis
. This condition is a life-threatening complication of syphilis infection. Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection.
Syphilitic meningitis is similar to meningitis caused by other germs (organisms), but it doesn't develop as quickly.
Risks for syphilitic meningitis include a past infection with syphilis or other sexually transmitted illnesses such as
gonorrhea
. Syphilis infections are mainly spread through sex with an infected person. Sometimes, they may be passed by nonsexual contact.
Symptoms
Symptoms of syphilitic meningitis may include:
Changes in vision
, such as blurred vision, decreased vision
Fever
Headache
Mental status changes, including
confusion,
decreased attention span, and irritability
Nausea and vomiting
Stiff neck or shoulders, muscle aches
Seizures
Sensitivity to light (
photophobia
) and loud noises
Sleepiness,
lethargy
, hard to wake up
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show problems with the nerves, including nerves that regulate eye movement.
Tests may include:
Cerebral angiography
to check blood flow in the brain
Electroencephalogram
(EEG) to measure electrical activity in the brain
Head CT scan
Spinal tap
to obtain a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for examination
Serum VDRL or serum RPR (used as a screening test for syphilis infection)
If screening tests indicate a syphilis infection, more tests are done to confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment
The goals of treatment are to cure the infection and stop symptoms from getting worse. Treating the infection helps prevent new nerve damage and may reduce symptoms. Treatment does not reverse existing damage.
Medicines likely to be given include:
Penicillin or other antibiotics (such as tetracycline or erythromycin) for a long time to make sure the infection goes away.  It is typically given initially using the
intravenous
route.
Medicines for seizures.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Some people may need help eating, dressing, and caring for themselves. Confusion and other mental changes may either improve or continue long-term after antibiotic treatment.
Late-stage syphilis can cause nerve or heart damage. This can lead to disability and death.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Inability to care for self
Inability to communicate or interact
Seizures that may result in injury
Stroke
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Go to the emergency room or call 911 or the local emergency number if you have seizures.
Contact your provider if you have a severe headache with fever or other symptoms, especially if you have a history of syphilis infection.
Prevention
Proper treatment and follow-up of syphilis infections will reduce the risk of developing this type of meningitis.
If you are sexually active,
practice safer sex
and always use condoms.
All pregnant women should be screened for syphilis. Also, people at increased risk for getting syphilis should be screened for it. Common examples include men who have sex with men, people with HIV infection, young adults, and people with a history of incarceration, sex work, military service or illicit drug use.
Alternative Names
Meningitis - syphilitic; Neurosyphilis - syphilitic meningitis
Images
Meninges of the brain
Meninges of the spine
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
Primary syphilis
Syphilis - secondary on the palms
Late-stage syphilis
CSF cell count
CSF test for syphilis
References
Dionne JA, Ghanem KG. Syphilis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine.
27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 295.
Hasbun R, van de Beek D, Brouwer MC, Tunkel AR. Acute meningitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 87.
Radolf JD, Tramont EC, Salazar JC. Syphilis (Treponema pallidum). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 237.
US Preventive Services Task Force website. Syphilis infection in nonpregnant adolescents and adults: Screening.
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/announcements/final-recommendation-statement-screening-syphilis-infection-nonpregnant-adolescents-and-adults
. Updated September 27, 2022. Accessed November 9, 2024.
Review Date 8/29/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Meningitis
Syphilis