Aloe: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Aloe
Aloe
Aloe is an extract from the aloe plant. It is used in many skin care products. Aloe poisoning occurs when someone swallows this substance. However, aloe is not very poisonous.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
The substances that can be harmful are:
Aloe
Aloin
Where Found
Aloe is found in many different products, including:
Burn
medicines
Cosmetics
Hand creams
Other products may also contain aloe.
Symptoms
Symptoms of aloe poisoning include:
Breathing difficulty
(from breathing in a product that contains aloe)
Diarrhea
Loss of vision
Rash
Severe
abdominal pain
Skin irritation
Throat
swelling
(which may also cause breathing difficulty)
Vomiting
Home Care
Stop using the product.
Seek medical help right way. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
The person may receive:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
Fluids by IV (through a vein)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on how much aloe they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
Aloe is not very poisonous. Treatment is usually not needed. However, if you swallow it, you will likely have diarrhea.
A small number of people have an allergic reaction to aloe, which can be dangerous. Get medical help if a rash, throat tightness, difficulty breathing, or chest pain develop.
Alternative Names
Skin and sunburn treatments
References
Chan M. Popular herbs and nutritional supplements. In: Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds.
Conn's Current Therapy 2023
. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:1502-1510.
Davison K, Frank BL. Ethnobotany: plant-derived medical therapy. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 68.
Murray MT. Aloe vera (Cape Aloe). In: Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, eds.
Textbook of Natural Medicine
. 5th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2021:chap 52.
Sierpina VS, Mathis SE, Kamprath S. Irritable bowel syndrome. In: Rakel D, Minichiello VJ, eds.
Integrative Medicine
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 43.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.