Bleeding into the skin: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Bleeding into the skin
Bleeding into the skin
Bleeding into the skin can occur from broken blood vessels that form tiny red dots (called petechiae). Blood also can collect under the tissue in larger flat areas (called
purpura
), or in a very large bruised area (called an ecchymosis).
Considerations
Aside from the common bruise, bleeding into the skin or mucous membranes is a very significant sign and should always be checked out by a health care provider.
Redness of the skin (erythema) should not be mistaken for bleeding. Areas of bleeding into the skin do not become paler (blanch) when you press on the area, like the redness from erythema does.
Causes
Many things can cause bleeding under the skin. Some of them are:
Injury or trauma
Allergic reaction
Autoimmune disorders
Viral infection or illness affecting blood clotting (coagulation)
Thrombocytopenia
(low platelet count)
Medical treatment, including
radiation
and
chemotherapy
Antiplatelet medicines such as clopidogrel (Plavix)
Bruise (ecchymosis)
Birth (petechiae in the newborn)
Aging skin (ecchymosis)
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
(petechiae and purpura)
Henoch-Schonlein purpura
(purpura)
Leukemia (purpura and ecchymosis)
Medicines -- Anticoagulants such as warfarin or heparin (ecchymosis), aspirin (ecchymosis), steroids (ecchymosis)
Septicemia
(petechiae, purpura, ecchymosis)
Home Care
Protect aging skin. Avoid trauma such as bumping or pulling on skin areas. For a cut or scrape, use direct pressure to stop the bleeding.
If you have a drug reaction, ask your provider about stopping the drug. Otherwise, follow your prescribed therapy to treat the underlying cause of the problem.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You have sudden bleeding into the skin for no apparent reason
You notice unexplained bruising that does not go away
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will examine you and ask questions about the bleeding, such as:
Have you recently had an injury or accident?
Have you been ill lately?
Have you had radiation therapy or chemotherapy?
What other medical treatments have you had?
Do you take aspirin more than once a week?
Do you take warfarin, heparin, or other "blood thinners" (anticoagulants)?
Has the bleeding occurred repeatedly?
Have you always had a tendency to bleed into the skin?
Did the bleeding start in infancy (for example, with circumcision)?
Did it start with surgery or when you had a tooth pulled?
The following diagnostic tests may be performed:
Coagulation
tests including international normalized ratio (INR),
prothrombin time
,
partial thromboplastin time
, and levels of clotting factors
Complete blood count
(CBC) with
platelet count
and
blood differential
Bone marrow biopsy
Alternative Names
Ecchymoses; Skin spots - red; Pinpoint red spots on the skin; Petechiae; Purpura
Images
Black eye
References
Hayward CPM, Ma AD. Evaluation of the patient with suspected bleeding disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 126.
Juliano JJ, Cohen MS, Weber DJ. The acutely ill patient with fever and rash. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 57.
Schafer AI. Approach to the patient with bleeding or thrombosis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine.
27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 157.
Review Date 4/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bleeding
Bleeding Disorders
Bruises