Sodium carbonate poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Sodium carbonate poisoning
Sodium carbonate poisoning
Sodium carbonate (known as washing soda or soda ash) is a chemical found in many household and industrial products. This article focuses on poisoning due to sodium carbonate.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Sodium carbonate
Where Found
Sodium carbonate is found in:
Automatic dishwashing soaps
Clinitest (diabetes testing) tablets
Glass products
Pulp and paper products
Some bleaches
Some bubble bath solutions
Some steam iron cleaners
Note: This list is not all-inclusive.
Symptoms
Symptoms from swallowing sodium carbonate may include:
Breathing problems due to throat swelling
Collapse
Diarrhea
Drooling
Eye irritation, redness, and pain
Hoarseness
Low blood pressure (may develop rapidly)
Severe pain in the mouth, throat, chest, or abdominal area
Shock
Swallowing difficulty
Vomiting
Symptoms from skin or eye contact may include:
Skin burning, drainage, and pain
Eye burning, drainage, and pain
Vision loss
Home Care
Seek immediate medical help. Do not make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care professional.
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
If the chemical was swallowed, immediately give the person one glass of water, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider. Do not give water if the person is having symptoms (vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness) that make it hard to swallow.
If the person breathed in the poison, immediately move them to a place with fresh air.
Before Calling Emergency
If readily available, determine the following information:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Take the container with you to the emergency room.
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including:
Oxygen saturation
Temperature
Pulse
Breathing rate
Blood pressure
Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Airway and/or breathing support -- including oxygen via external delivery device or endotracheal intubation (placement of a breathing tube through the mouth or nose into the airway) with placement on a ventilator (life support breathing machine)
Blood tests
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Endoscopy -- a camera is used to examine down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach
Laryngoscopy or bronchoscopy -- a device (laryngoscope) or camera (bronchoscope) is used to examine the throat and airway to see burns
Eye and skin irrigation
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
X-rays of the chest and abdomen
Outlook (Prognosis)
Sodium carbonate is usually not very toxic in small amounts. However, if you swallow large amounts, you may have symptoms. In this rare situation, long-term effects, even death, are possible if you do not receive quick and aggressive treatment.
Alternative Names
Sal soda poisoning; Soda ash poisoning; Disodium salt poisoning; Carbonic acid poisoning; Washing soda poisoning
References
Clawson A, Quang L. Principles of toxin assessment and screening. In: Zimmerman JJ, Clark RSB, Fuhrman BP, et al, eds.
Fuhrman and Zimmerman's Pediatric Critical Care
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 125.
Hoyte C. Caustics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 143.
Review Date 7/12/2024
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.