Facial swelling: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Facial swelling
Facial swelling
Facial swelling is the buildup of fluid in the tissues of the face. Swelling may also affect the neck and upper arms.
Considerations
If the facial swelling is mild, it may be hard to detect. Let the health care provider know the following:
Is it painful and where it hurts
How long the swelling has lasted
What makes it better or worse
If you have other symptoms
Causes
Causes of facial swelling may include:
Allergic reaction
(
allergic rhinitis
, hay fever, or a
bee sting
)
Angioedema
Blood transfusion reaction
Cellulitis
Conjunctivitis
(inflammation of the eye)
Drug reactions, including those due to aspirin, penicillin, sulfa, glucocorticoids, and others
Head, nose, or jaw surgery
Injury or trauma to the face (such as a burn)
Malnutrition (when severe)
Obesity
Salivary gland disorders
Sinusitis
Stye
with swelling around the infected eye
Tooth abscess
Home Care
Apply cool compresses to reduce swelling from an injury. Raise the head of the bed (or use extra pillows) to help reduce facial swelling.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have:
Sudden, painful, or severe facial swelling
Facial swelling that lasts a while, particularly if it is getting worse over time
Difficulty breathing
Fever
, tenderness, or redness, which suggests infection
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Emergency treatment is needed if facial swelling is caused by burns or if you have breathing problems.
The provider will ask about your medical and personal history. This helps determine treatment or if any medical tests are needed. Questions may include:
How long has the facial swelling lasted?
When did it begin?
What makes it worse?
What makes it better?
Have you come into contact with something you might be allergic to?
What medicines are you taking?
Did you recently injure your face?
Did you have a medical test or surgery recently?
What other symptoms do you have? For example:
facial pain
, sneezing, difficulty breathing,
hives
or
rash
,
eye redness
, fever.
Alternative Names
Puffy face; Swelling of the face; Moon face; Facial edema
Images
Edema - central on the face
References
Dinulos JGH. Urticaria, angioedema and pruritus. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide in Diagnosis and Therapy
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 6.
Guluma K, Lee JE. Ophthalmology. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 57.
Matlock AG, Pfaff JA. Otolaryngology. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 58.
Pedigo RA. Oral medicine. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 56.
Review Date 1/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Edema
Facial Injuries and Disorders