Pheniramine overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Pheniramine overdose
Pheniramine overdose
Pheniramine is a type of medicine called an antihistamine. It helps relieve allergy symptoms. Pheniramine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual
overdose
. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Pheniramine
Where Found
Pheniramine can be found in these medicines:
Advil Allergy & Congestion Relief
Advil Allergy Sinus
Advil Multi-Symptom Cold & Flu
Children's Advil Allergy Sinus
Bromfed DM
Polmon; Tussicaps
Tuxarin ER
Tuzistra XR
Vituz
Zutripro
Naphcon-A
Visine
Visine-A
Other products may also contain pheniramine.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of an overdose of pheniramine in different parts of the body.
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Inability to urinate
Difficulty urinating
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Blurred vision
Dilated (enlarged) pupils
Dry mouth
Ringing in the ears
HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
Rapid heartbeat
Increased blood pressure
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Coma
Convulsions (
seizures
)
Delirium
, hallucinations
Disorientation
Drowsiness
Fever
Nervousness, tremors
Unsteadiness, weakness
SKIN
Flushed skin
Warm skin
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Nausea and vomiting
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs
Chest x-ray
CT scan of the brain
ECG
(electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (given through a vein)
Laxative
Medicine to treat symptoms
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach (
gastric lavage
)
Catheter (thin, flexible tube) into the bladder if person cannot urinate on their own
Outlook (Prognosis)
If the person survives the first 24 hours, chances of recovery are good. Few people die from an antihistamine overdose.
With extremely high doses of antihistamines, serious heart rhythm disturbances may occur, which may result in death.
Alternative Names
Brompheniramine maleate; Chlorpheniramine maleate; Dexchlorpheniramine maleate
References
Aronson JK. Antihistamines. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:606-618.
Hoppe JA, Monte AA. Anticholinergics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 140.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cold and Cough Medicines