Cold wave lotion poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Cold wave lotion poisoning
Cold wave lotion poisoning
Cold wave lotion is a hair care product used to create permanent waves ("a perm"). Cold wave lotion poisoning occurs from swallowing, breathing in, or touching the lotion.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Thioglycolates are the poisonous ingredients in these lotions.
Where Found
Thioglycolates are found in:
Hair perm (permanent) kits
Various cold wave lotions
Other products may also contain cold wave lotion.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of cold wave lotion poisoning in different parts of the body.
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Mouth irritation
Burning and redness of the eyes
Possibly serious damage (such as ulcers, erosions, and deep burns) to the cornea of the eyes
HEART AND BLOOD
Weakness due to low blood sugar
LUNGS AND AIRWAYS
Shortness of breath
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Drowsiness
Headache
Seizures
(convulsions)
SKIN
Bluish-colored lips and fingers
Rash
(red or blistered skin)
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Cramping
Diarrhea
Stomach pain
Vomiting
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to. If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
If the chemical was swallowed, give the person water or milk right away, if a provider tells you to do so. Do not give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness. If the person breathed in the poison, move them to fresh air right away.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs and breathing machine (ventilator)
Chest x-ray
ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)
Endoscopy
(camera placed down the throat to see burns in the esophagus and the stomach)
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Laxative
Surgery to remove burned skin (debridement)
Washing of the skin (irrigation), perhaps every few hours for several days
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on the amount of poison swallowed or otherwise exposed to and how quickly treatment is received. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
Skin problems will clear up when use of the product is stopped. If the lotion is swallowed, recovery normally occurs if the right treatment is received in time.
Most home permanent kits that contain cold wave lotions are watered down to avoid poisoning. However, some hair salons may use stronger forms that need to be diluted before use. Exposure to this stronger cold wave lotion will cause much more damage than the ones used at home.
Alternative Names
Thioglycolate poisoning
References
Draelos ZD. Cosmetics and cosmeceuticals. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds.
Dermatology
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 153.
James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Contact dermatitis and drug eruptions. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology
. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 6.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cosmetics