Histoplasma skin test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Histoplasma skin test
Histoplasma skin test
The histoplasma skin test is used to check if you have been exposed to a fungus called
Histoplasma capsulatum.
The fungus causes an infection called
histoplasmosis
.
How the Test is Performed
Your health care provider cleans an area of your skin, usually the forearm. An
allergen
is injected just below the cleaned skin surface. An allergen is a substance that causes an allergic reaction. The injection site is checked at 24 hours and at 48 hours for signs of a reaction. Occasionally, the reaction may not appear until the fourth day.
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is necessary for this test.
How the Test will Feel
You may feel a brief sting as the needle is inserted just below the skin.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is used to determine if you have been exposed to the fungus that causes histoplasmosis.
Normal Results
No reaction (inflammation) at the site of the test is normal. The skin test can rarely make histoplasmosis antibody tests turn positive.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
A reaction means you have been exposed to
Histoplasma capsulatum
. It does not mean you have an active infection.
Risks
There is a slight risk of
anaphylactic shock
(a severe reaction).
Considerations
This test is rarely used today. It has been replaced by a variety of
blood
and urine tests.
Alternative Names
Histoplasmosis skin test
References
Deepe GS.
Histoplasma capsulatum
(histoplasmosis). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 263.
Iwen PC, Thompson GR, Wiederhold NP. Mycotic diseases. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 60.
Review Date 8/26/2023
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Histoplasmosis