Brompheniramine overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Brompheniramine overdose
Brompheniramine overdose
Brompheniramine is a type of medicine called an antihistamine, which helps relieve allergy symptoms. Brompheniramine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Brompheniramine and brompheniramine maleate are the poisonous ingredients in this medicine.
Where Found
Brompheniramine may be found in the following brand-name product:
Bromfed-DM
Other medicines may also contain brompheniramine.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of a brompheniramine overdose in different parts of the body.
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Inability to urinate
Difficulty urinating
EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT
Blurred vision
Dilated (wide) pupils
Dry mouth
Ringing in the ears
HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
Rapid heartbeat
Increased blood pressure
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Coma
Convulsions (
seizures
)
Delirium
(confusion)
Disorientation,
hallucinations
Drowsiness
Fever
Irregular or rapid heartbeat
Nervousness
Tremor
Unsteadiness, weakness
SKIN
Flushed and dry skin
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Constipation
Nausea and vomiting
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the medicine (and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
Your provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain for neurologic symptoms
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Medicine to treat symptoms
Activated charcoal
Laxatives
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach (
gastric lavage
)
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Outlook (Prognosis)
If the person survives the first 24 hours, chances of survival are good. Few people actually die from an antihistamine overdose. With very high doses of antihistamines, however, serious heart rhythm disturbances may occur, which can cause death.
Keep all medicines in child-proof bottles and out of the reach of children.
References
Aronson JK. Anticholinergic drugs. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:534-539.
Hoppe JA, Monte AA. Anticholinergics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 140.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cold and Cough Medicines