Hemolytic-uremic syndrome: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Shiga-like toxin producing
E coli
hemolytic-uremic syndrome (STEC-HUS) is a disorder that most often occurs when an infection in the digestive system produces toxic substances. These substances destroy red blood cells and cause kidney injury.
Causes
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) often occurs after a gastrointestinal infection with
E coli
bacteria (
Escherichia coli
O157:H7). However, the condition has also been linked to other gastrointestinal infections, including
shigella
and
salmonella
. It has also been linked to non-gastrointestinal infections.
HUS is most common in children. It is the most common cause of acute kidney failure in children. Several large outbreaks have been linked to undercooked hamburger meat contaminated with
E coli
.
E coli
can be transmitted through:
Contact from one person to another
Consuming uncooked food, such as milk products or beef
STEC-HUS is not to be confused with atypical HUS (aHUS) which is not infection-related. It is similar to another disease called
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
(TTP).
Symptoms
STEC-HUS often begins with vomiting and diarrhea, which may be bloody. Within a week, the person may become weak and irritable. People with this condition may urinate less than normal. Urine output may almost stop.
Red blood cell destruction leads to symptoms of
anemia
.
Early symptoms:
Blood in the stools
Irritability
Fever
Lethargy
Vomiting
and
diarrhea
Weakness
Later symptoms:
Bruising
Decreased consciousness
Low urine output
No urine output
Pallor
Seizures
-- rare
Skin rash that looks like fine red spots (
petechiae
)
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. This may show:
Liver or spleen swelling
Nervous system changes
Laboratory tests will show signs of
hemolytic anemia
and
acute renal failure
. Tests may include:
Blood clotting tests (
PT
and
PTT
)
Comprehensive metabolic panel
may show increased levels of
BUN
and
creatinine
Complete blood count
(CBC) may show increased white blood cell count and decreased red blood cell count
Platelet count
is usually reduced
Review of a blood smear, which shows deformed and fragmented red blood cells
Urinalysis
may reveal blood and protein in the urine
Urine protein
test can show the amount of protein in the urine
Other tests:
Stool culture
may be positive for a certain type of
E coli
bacteria or other bacteria
Colonoscopy
Kidney biopsy
(in rare cases)
Treatment
Treatment may involve:
Dialysis
Medicines, such as corticosteroids
Management of fluids and electrolytes
Transfusions of packed red blood cells and platelets
Outlook (Prognosis)
This is a serious illness in both children and adults, and it can cause death. With proper treatment, more than half of people will recover. The outcome is better in children than adults.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Blood clotting problems
Hemolytic anemia
Kidney failure
Hypertension leading to seizures, irritability, and other nervous system problems
Too few platelets (
thrombocytopenia
)
Uremia
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you develop symptoms of HUS. Emergency symptoms include:
Blood in the stool
No urination
Reduced alertness (consciousness)
Contact your provider if you have had an episode of HUS and your urine output decreases, or you develop other new symptoms.
Prevention
You can prevent the known cause,
E coli
, by cooking hamburger and other meats well. You should also avoid contact with unclean water and follow proper hand washing methods.
Alternative Names
HUS; STEC-HUS; Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Images
Male urinary system
References
Alexander T, Licht C, Smoyer WE, Rosenblum ND. Diseases of the kidney and upper urinary tract in children. In: Yu ASL, Chertow GM, Luyckx VA, Marsden PA, Skorecki K, Taal MW, eds.
Brenner and Rector's The Kidney
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap: 72.
George G, Friedman KD. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and the hemolytic uremic syndromes. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 132.
Mele C, Noris M, Remuzzi G. Hemolytic uremic syndrome. In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum JA, Ricci Z, eds.
Critical Care Nephrology
. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 50.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
E. Coli Infections