Muscle disorder: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Muscle disorder
Muscle disorder
A muscle disorder causes patterns of weakness, loss of muscle tissue, electromyogram (EMG) findings, or biopsy results that suggest a muscle problem. The muscle disorder can be inherited, such as
muscular dystrophy
, or acquired, such as alcoholic or steroid myopathy.
The medical name for muscle disorder is myopathy.
Symptoms
The main symptom is weakness.
Other symptoms include cramps and stiffness.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will take your medical history and perform a neurological exam. Tests that may be ordered include:
Blood and urine tests
Electromyography
(EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS)
Muscle biopsy
Genetic tests to look for conditions that run in families. This can be tested with blood work or sometimes saliva testing.
A muscle biopsy examines a tissue sample under a microscope to confirm disease. Sometimes, a blood or saliva test to check for a genetic disorder is all that is needed based on someone's symptoms and family history.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the cause. It usually includes:
Bracing
Medicines (such as corticosteroids in some cases)
Enzyme replacement therapy
Gene replacement therapy
Physical, respiratory, and occupational therapies
Preventing the condition from getting worse by treating the underlying condition causing the muscle weakness
Surgery (sometimes)
Your health care provider can tell you more about your condition and treatment options.
Alternative Names
Myopathic changes; Myopathy; Muscle problem
Images
Superficial anterior muscles
References
Borg K, Ensrud E. Myopathies. In: Frontera WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD Jr, eds.
Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation: Musculoskeletal Disorders, Pain, and Rehabilitation
. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 136.
Doughty CT, Amato AA. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 109.
Selcen D. Muscle diseases. In: Goldman L, Cooney K, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 389.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Muscle Disorders