Coarctation of the aorta: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Coarctation of the aorta
Coarctation of the aorta
The aorta is a larger artery that carries blood from the heart to the vessels that supply the rest of the body with blood. If part of the aorta is narrowed, it is hard for blood to pass through the artery. This is called coarctation of the aorta. It is a type of birth defect.
Causes
The exact cause of coarctation of the aorta is unknown. It results from abnormalities in development of the aorta prior to birth.
Aortic coarctation is more common in people with certain genetic disorders, such as
Turner syndrome
.
Aortic coarctation is one of the more common heart conditions that are present at birth (congenital heart defects). This abnormality accounts for about 5% of all congenital heart defects. It is most often diagnosed in children or adults under age 40.
People who have this problem with their aorta may also have a weak area in the wall of blood vessels in their brain. This weakness causes the blood vessel to bulge or balloon out. This is known as a berry aneurysm. These may rupture causing a certain type of stroke (due to bleeding).
Coarctation of the aorta may be seen with other congenital heart defects, such as:
Bicuspid aortic valve
Aortic stenosis
Ventricular septal defect
Patent ductus arteriosus
Symptoms
Symptoms depend on how much blood can flow through the artery. Other heart defects may also play a role.
About half of newborns with this problem will have symptoms in the first few days of life. These can include breathing fast, problems eating, increased irritability, and increased sleepiness or becoming poorly responsive. In severe cases, the infant may develop heart failure and shock.
In milder cases, symptoms may not develop until the child has reached adolescence. Symptoms can include:
Chest pain
Cold feet or legs
Dizziness
or
fainting
Decreased ability to exercise
Failure to thrive
Leg cramps
with exercise
Nosebleed
Poor growth
Pounding headache
Shortness of breath
There may also be no symptoms.
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will perform a physical exam and check the blood pressure and pulse in the arms and legs.
The pulse in the groin (femoral) area or feet will be weaker than the pulse in the arms or neck (carotid). Sometimes, the femoral pulse may not be able to be felt at all.
The blood pressure in the legs is usually less than in the arms. Blood pressure is usually higher in the arms after infancy.
The provider will use a stethoscope to listen to the heart and check for murmurs. People with aortic coarctation often have a harsh-sounding murmur that can be heard underneath the left collar bone or from the back. Other types of murmurs may also be present.
Coarctation is often discovered during a newborn's first exam or a well-baby exam. Taking the pulse in an infant is an important part of the exam, because there may not be any other symptoms until the child is older.
Tests to diagnose this condition may include:
Cardiac catheterization
and
aortography
Chest x-ray
Echocardiography
is the most common test to diagnose this condition, and it may also be used to monitor the person after surgery
Heart CT
may be needed in older children
MRI
or
MR angiography
of the chest may be needed in older children
Both Doppler ultrasound and catheterization can be used to see if there are any differences in blood pressure in different areas of the aorta.
Treatment
Most newborns with symptoms will have surgery either right after birth or soon afterward. They will first  receive medicines to stabilize them.
Children who are diagnosed when they are older will also need surgery. In most cases, the symptoms are not as severe, so more time can be taken to plan for surgery.
During surgery, the narrowed part of the aorta will be removed or opened.
If the problem area is small, the two free ends of the aorta may be reconnected. This is called an end-to-end
anastomosis
.
If a large part of the aorta is removed, a graft or one of the patient's own arteries may be used to fill the gap. The
graft
may be man-made or be taken from a cadaver.
Sometimes, doctors will try to stretch open the narrowed part of the aorta by using a balloon that is widened inside the blood vessel. This type of procedure is called a
balloon angioplasty
. It may be done instead of surgery, but it has a higher rate of failure.
Older children usually need medicines to treat high blood pressure after surgery. Some will need lifelong treatment for this problem.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Coarctation of the aorta can be cured with surgery. Symptoms quickly get better after surgery.
However, there is an increased risk for death due to heart problems among those who have had their aorta repaired. Lifelong follow-up with a cardiologist is recommended.
Without treatment, most people die before age 40. For this reason, doctors most often recommend that the person has surgery before age 10. Most of the time, surgery to fix the coarctation is done during infancy.
Narrowing or coarctation of the artery can return after surgery. This is more likely in people who had surgery as a newborn.
Possible Complications
Complications that may occur before, during, or soon after surgery include:
An area of the aorta becomes very large or balloons out
Tear in the wall of the aorta
Rupture of the aorta
Bleeding in the brain
Early development of
coronary artery disease
(CAD)
Endocarditis
(infection in the heart)
Heart failure
Hoarseness
Kidney problems
Paralysis of the lower half of the body (a rare complication of surgery to repair coarctation)
Severe high blood pressure
Stroke
Long-term complications include:
Continued or repeated narrowing of the aorta
Endocarditis
High blood pressure
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You or your child has symptoms of coarctation of the aorta
You develop fainting or
chest pain
(these may be signs of a serious problem)
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent this disorder. However, being aware of your risk may lead to early  diagnosis and treatment.
Alternative Names
Aortic coarctation
Patient Instructions
Pediatric heart surgery - discharge
Images
Coarctation of the aorta
References
Valente AM, Dorfman AL, Babu-Narayan SV, Krieger EV. Congenital heart disease in the adolescent and adult. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 82.
Well A, Fraser CD. Congenital heart disease. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery.
21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 59.
Review Date 10/23/2023
Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Congenital Heart Defects