TORCH screen: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
TORCH screen
TORCH screen
The TORCH screen is a group of blood tests. These tests check for several different infections in a newborn. The full form of TORCH is
toxoplasmosis
,
rubella cytomegalovirus
, herpes simplex, and HIV. However, it can also contain other newborn infections.
Sometimes the test is spelled TORCHS, where the extra "S" stands for syphilis.
How the Test is Performed
The health care provider will clean a small area (usually the finger). They will stick it with a sharp needle or cutting instrument called a lancet. The blood may be collected in a small glass tube, on a slide, onto a test strip, or into a small container. If there is any bleeding, cotton or a bandage may be applied to the puncture site.
How to Prepare for the Test
For more information about how you can prepare your child, see
infant test or procedure preparation
.
How the Test will Feel
While the blood sample is being taken, your child will most likely feel a prick and a brief stinging sensation.
Why the Test is Performed
If a woman becomes infected with certain germs during her pregnancy, the baby may also become infected while still in the womb. The baby is more sensitive to harm from infection during the first 3 to 4 months of the pregnancy.
This test is used to screen infants for TORCH infections. These infections may lead to the following problems in the baby:
Birth defects
Growth delay
Brain and nervous system problems
Normal Results
Normal values mean there is no sign of infection in the newborn.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
If high levels of antibodies called immunoglobulins (IgM) against a certain germ are found in the infant, there may be an infection. Your provider may order more tests to confirm a diagnosis.
Risks
Blood draws carry a small risk of bleeding, bruising, and infection at the involved site.
Considerations
The TORCH screen is useful for determining whether there may be an infection. If the result is positive, more testing will be needed to confirm the diagnosis. The mother will also need to be checked.
References
Harrison GJ. Approach to infections in the fetus and newborn. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, Steinbach WJ, Hotez PJ, eds.
Feigin and Cherry's Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 66.
Nerenz RD, Braga JA. Pregnancy and its disorders. In: Nader R, Chiu RWK, Young I, Burnham CAD, Wittwer CT, eds.
Tietz Textbook of Laboratory Medicine
. 7th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2023:chap 59.
Remington JS, Klein JO, Maldonado YA, et al. Current concepts of infections of the fetus and newborn infant. In: Maldonado YA, Nizet V, Barnett ED, et al, eds.
Remington and Klein's infectious Diseases of the Fetus and Newborn
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 1.
Stokes C, Melvin AJ. Viral infections of the fetus and newborn. In: Gleason CA, Sawyer T, eds.
Avery's Diseases of the Newborn
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 34.
Review Date 7/31/2024
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Newborn Screening