Delayed puberty in girls: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Delayed puberty in girls
Delayed puberty in girls
Delayed puberty in girls occurs when breasts don't develop by age 13 or menstrual periods do not begin by age 16.
Puberty changes
occur when the body starts making sex hormones. These changes normally begin to appear in girls between ages 8 to 14 years.
With delayed puberty, these changes either don't occur at the normal age, or if they do, they don't progress normally. Delayed puberty is more common in boys than in girls.
Causes
In most cases of delayed puberty, growth changes just begin later than usual, sometimes called a late bloomer. Once puberty begins, it progresses normally. This pattern runs in families. This is the most common cause of late maturity.
Another common cause of delayed puberty in girls is lack of body fat. Being too thin can disrupt the normal process of puberty. This can occur in girls who:
Are very active in sports, such as swimmers, runners, or dancers
Have an eating disorder, such as
anorexia nervosa
or
bulimia
Are undernourished
Delayed puberty also may occur when the
ovaries
produce too little or no female hormones. This is called
hypogonadism
.
This can occur when the ovaries are damaged or are not developing as they should.
It can also occur if there's a problem with the
parts of the brain involved in puberty
.
Certain medical conditions or treatments can lead to hypogonadism, including:
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
Hypothyroidism
Diabetes mellitus
Cystic fibrosis
Sickle cell disease
Anorexia nervosa
Liver and kidney disease
Autoimmune diseases
, such as Hashimoto thyroiditis or Addison disease
Chemotherapy
or radiation cancer treatment that damages the ovaries
A tumor in the pituitary gland
Turner syndrome
, a genetic disorder
Symptoms
Girls begin puberty between ages 8 and 14. With delayed puberty, your child may have one or more of these symptoms:
Breasts do not develop by age 13
No pubic hair
Menstruation does not start by age 16
Short height and slower rate of growth
Uterus does not develop
Bone age is less than your child's age
There may be other symptoms, depending on what causes delayed puberty.
Exams and Tests
Your child's health care provider will take a family history to know if delayed puberty runs in the family.
The provider also may ask about your child's:
Eating habits
Exercise habits
Health history
The provider will perform a physical exam. Tests may include:
Blood tests to check for levels of certain growth hormones, sex hormones, and thyroid hormones
LH response to GnRH blood test
Chromosomal analysis
or other genetic testing
MRI of head for tumors
Ultrasound of ovaries and uterus
An x-ray of the left hand and wrist to evaluate bone age may be obtained at the initial visit to see if the bones are maturing. It may be repeated over time, if needed.
Treatment
The treatment will depend on the cause of delayed puberty.
If there is a family history of late puberty, often no treatment is needed. In time, puberty will begin on its own.
In girls with too little body fat, gaining a bit of weight may help trigger puberty.
If delayed puberty is caused by a disease or an eating disorder, treating the cause may help puberty to develop normally.
If puberty fails to develop, or the child is very distressed because of the delay, hormone therapy can help start puberty. The provider will:
Give estrogen (a sex hormone) at very low doses, either orally or as a patch
Monitor growth changes and increase the dose every 6 to 12 months
Add progesterone (a sex hormone) to start menstruation
Give oral contraceptive pills to maintain normal levels of sex hormones
Support Groups
More information and support to understand more about your child's growth can be found at:
The MAGIC Foundation --
www.magicfoundation.org
Turner Syndrome Society of the United States --
www.turnersyndrome.org
Outlook (Prognosis)
Delayed puberty that runs in the family will resolve itself.
Some girls with certain conditions, such as those with damage to their ovaries, may need to take hormones their entire lives.
Possible Complications
The estrogen replacement therapy may have side effects.
Other possible complications include:
Early
menopause
Infertility
Low bone density and fractures later in life (osteoporosis)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
Your child shows a slow growth rate
Puberty does not begin by 13 years of age
Puberty begins, but does not progress normally
A referral to a pediatric endocrinologist may be recommended for girls with delayed puberty.
Alternative Names
Delayed sexual development - girls; Pubertal delay - girls; Constitutional delayed puberty
References
Escobar O, Gurtunca N, Viswanathan P, Witchel SF. Pediatric endocrinology. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, Garrison J, eds.
Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 9.
Garibaldi LR, Chemaitilly W. Disorders of pubertal development. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 600.
Haddad NG, Eugster EA. Endocrinology of pubertal disorders. In: Robertson RP, ed.
DeGroot's Endocrinology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 103.
Pitteloud N, Papadakis GE, Jacobs AN. Physiology and disorders of puberty. In Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 23.
Sanii YE, Rosenfeld A. Adolescent medicine. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
The Harriet Lane Handbook : The Johns Hopkins Hospital
. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 5.
Review Date 7/31/2024
Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz, MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Puberty