Foot, leg, and ankle swelling: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Foot, leg, and ankle swelling
Foot, leg, and ankle swelling
Painless swelling of the feet and ankles is a common problem, especially among older people.
Abnormal buildup of fluid in the ankles, feet, and legs can cause swelling. This fluid buildup and swelling is called edema.
Considerations
Painless swelling may affect both legs and may include the calves or even the thighs. The effect of gravity makes the swelling most noticeable in the lower part of your body.
Causes
Foot, leg, and ankle swelling is common when the person also:
Is overweight
Has a
blood clot in the leg
Is older
Has a leg infection
Has
veins in the legs that cannot properly pump blood
back to the heart (called venous insufficiency, most often due to varicose veins)
Injury or surgery involving the leg, ankle, or foot can also cause swelling. Swelling may also occur after pelvic surgery, especially for cancer.
Long airplane flights or car rides, as well as standing for long periods of time, often lead to some swelling in the feet and ankles.
Swelling may occur in women who take estrogen, or during parts of the menstrual cycle. Most women have some swelling during pregnancy. More severe swelling during pregnancy may be a sign of
preeclampsia
, a serious condition that includes high blood pressure and significant swelling.
Swollen legs may be a sign of
heart failure
,
kidney failure
, or
liver failure
. In these conditions, there is too much fluid in the body, and it collects in the legs.
Certain medicines may also cause your legs to swell. Some of these are:
Antidepressants, including MAO inhibitors and tricyclics
Blood pressure medicines called calcium channel blockers
Hormones, such as estrogen (in birth control pills or hormone replacement therapy) and testosterone
Steroids
Home Care
Some tips that may help reduce swelling:
Put your legs on pillows to raise them above your heart while lying down.
Exercise your legs. This helps pump fluid from your legs back to your heart.
Follow a
low-salt diet
, which may reduce fluid buildup and swelling.
Wear
support stockings
(sold at most drugstores and medical supply stores).
When traveling, take breaks often to stand up and move around.
Avoid wearing tight clothing or garters around your thighs.
Lose weight if you need to.
Never stop taking any medicines you think may be causing swelling without first talking to your health care provider.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call 911  or the local emergency number if:
You feel short of breath.
You have
chest pain
, especially if it feels like pressure or tightness.
Contact your provider right away if:
You have
heart disease
or kidney disease and the swelling gets worse.
You have a history of
liver disease
and now have swelling in your legs or abdomen.
Your swollen foot or leg is red or warm to the touch.
You have a
fever
.
You are pregnant and have more than just mild swelling or have a sudden increase in swelling.
You have new or worsened swelling in only one leg.
Also contact your provider if self-care measures do not help or swelling gets worse.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will take a medical history and do a thorough physical examination, paying special attention to your heart, lungs, abdomen, lymph nodes, legs, and feet.
Your provider will ask questions such as:
What body parts swell? Your ankles, feet, legs? Above the knee or below?
Do you have swelling at all times or is it worse in the morning or evening?
What makes your swelling better?
What makes your swelling worse?
Does the swelling get better when you raise your legs?
Have you had
blood clots
in your legs or lungs?
Have you had varicose veins?
What other symptoms do you have?
Diagnostic tests that may be done include:
Blood tests, such as a
complete blood count
(CBC) or
blood chemistry
Chest x-ray
or
extremity x-ray
Doppler ultrasound examination of your leg veins
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Urinalysis
Your treatment will focus on the cause of the swelling. Your provider may prescribe diuretics to reduce the swelling, but these can have side effects. Home treatment for leg swelling that is not related to a serious medical condition should be tried before drug therapy.
Alternative Names
Swelling of the ankles - feet - legs; Ankle swelling; Foot swelling; Leg swelling; Edema - peripheral; Peripheral edema
Images
Foot swelling
Lower leg edema
References
Magee DJ, Manske RC. Lower leg, ankle, and foot. Magee DJ, Manske RC, eds.
Orthopedic Physical Assessment.
7th ed. St Louis MO: Elsevier; 2021:chap 13.
Quick CRG, Biers SM, Arulampalam THA. Pathophysiology, clinical features and diagnosis of vascular disease affecting the limbs. In: Quick CRG, Biers SM, Arulampalam THA, eds.
Essential Surgery: Problems, Diagnosis and Management.
6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 40.
Seller RH, Symons AB. Swelling of the legs. In: Seller RH, Symons AB, eds.
Differential Diagnosis of Common Complaints.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 31.
Review Date 6/20/2023
Updated by: Jacob Berman, MD, MPH, Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Ankle Injuries and Disorders
Edema
Foot Injuries and Disorders
Leg Injuries and Disorders