Zinc poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Zinc poisoning
Zinc poisoning
Zinc is a metal as well as an essential mineral. Your body needs zinc to function properly. If you take a multivitamin, chances are it has zinc in it. In this form, zinc is both necessary and relatively safe.
Zinc can also be obtained in your diet
.
Zinc, however, can be mixed with other materials to make industrial items such as paint, dyes, and more. These combination substances can be particularly toxic.
This article discusses poisoning from zinc.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Zinc
Where Found
Zinc can be found in many things, including:
Compounds used to make paint, rubber, dyes, wood preservatives, and ointments
Rust prevention coatings
Vitamin and mineral supplements
Zinc chloride
Zinc oxide (relatively unharmful)
Zinc acetate
Zinc sulfate
Heated or burned galvanized metal (releases zinc fumes)
Note: This list may not be all inclusive.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Body pain
Burning sensations
Convulsions
Cough
Fever and chills
Low blood pressure
Metallic taste in mouth
No urine output
Rash
Shock
,
collapse
Shortness of breath
Vomiting
Watery or bloody diarrhea
Yellow eyes or yellow skin
Home Care
Seek medical help right away.
Immediately give the person milk, unless instructed otherwise by a health care provider.
Before Calling Emergency
The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (as well as the ingredients and strength if known)
When it was swallowed or inhaled
The amount swallowed or inhaled
However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
If you go to the emergency room, take the container for the poison with you, if possible.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation),and ventilator (breathing machine)
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan
(computerized axial tomography)
Electrocardiogram
(ECG), or heart tracing
Fluids through the vein (intravenous or IV)
Laxative
In serious cases, medicines called chelators, which remove zinc from the bloodstream may be needed, and the person may need to be hospitalized.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment was received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. If symptoms are mild, the person will usually make a full recovery. If the poisoning is severe, death may occur up to a week after swallowing the poison.
References
Aronson JK. Zinc. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:568-572.
Kao LW, Tormoehlen L, Froberg BA. Chronic poisoning: Trace metals and others. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 20.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Poisoning