X-ray - skeleton: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
X-ray - skeleton
X-ray - skeleton
A skeletal
x-ray
is an imaging test used to look at your bones. It is used to detect
fractures
, tumors, or conditions that cause wearing away (degeneration) of the bone.
How the Test is Performed
The test is done in a hospital radiology department or in your health care provider's office by an x-ray technologist.
You will lie on a table or stand in front of the x-ray machine, depending on the bone that is injured. You may be asked to change position so that different x-ray views can be taken.
The x-rays pass through your body. A computer or special film records the images.
Structures that are dense (such as bone) will block most of the x-ray particles. These areas will appear white. Metal and contrast media (special dye used to highlight areas of the body) will also appear white. Structures containing air will be black. Muscle, fat, and fluid will appear as shades of gray.
How to Prepare for the Test
Tell your provider if you are pregnant. You must remove all jewelry before the x-ray.
How the Test will Feel
The x-rays are painless. Changing positions and moving the injured area for different x-ray views may be uncomfortable. If the whole skeleton is being imaged, the test most often takes 1 hour or more.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is used to look for:
Fractures or broken bone
Cancer that has spread to other areas of the body
Osteomyelitis
(inflammation of the bone caused by an infection)
Bone damage due to trauma (such as an auto accident) or degenerative conditions
Abnormalities in the soft tissue around the bone
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal findings include:
Fractures
Bone tumors
Degenerative bone conditions
Osteomyelitis
Risks
There is low radiation exposure. X-rays machines are set to provide the smallest amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits.
Children and the fetuses of pregnant women are more sensitive to the risks of the x-ray. A protective shield may be worn over areas not being scanned.
Alternative Names
Skeletal survey
Images
X-ray
Skeleton
Skeletal spine
Hand X-ray
Skeleton (posterior view)
The skeleton (lateral view)
References
Contreras F, Perez J, Jose J. Imaging overview. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds.
DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 7.
Kapoor G, Toms AP. Current status of imaging of the musculoskeletal system. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.
Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology.
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 38.
Review Date 4/1/2025
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor Emeritus, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bone Diseases
Fractures
X-Rays