Bone x-ray: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Bone x-ray
Bone x-ray
A bone
x-ray
is an imaging test to look at the bones.
How the Test is Performed
The test is done in a hospital radiology department or in your health care provider's office by an x-ray technician. For the test, you will position the bone to be x-rayed on the table. Pictures are then taken, and the bone is repositioned for different views.
How to Prepare for the Test
Tell your health care provider if you are pregnant. You must remove all jewelry for the x-ray.
How the Test will Feel
The x-rays are painless. Changing position for getting different views of the bone may be uncomfortable.
Why the Test is Performed
A bone x-ray is used to
look for injuries or
conditions  affecting the bone.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal findings include:
Fractures or broken bone
Bone tumors
Degenerative bone conditions
Osteomyelitis
(bone infection)
Additional conditions under which the test may be performed:
Cystic fibrosis
Multiple endocrine neoplasia
(MEN) II
Multiple myeloma
Osgood-Schlatter disease
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteomalacia
Paget's disease
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Rickets
Risks
There is low radiation exposure. X-ray machines are set to provide the smallest amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the risk is low compared with the benefits.
Children and the fetuses of pregnant women are more sensitive to the risks of the x-ray. A protective shield may be worn over areas not being scanned.
Alternative Names
X-ray - bone
Images
Skeleton
Skeletal spine
Osteogenic sarcoma - x-ray
Hand X-ray
X-ray
References
Contreras F, Perez J, Jose J. Imaging overview. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR. eds.
DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 7.
Kapoor G, Toms AP. Current status of imaging of the musculoskeletal system. In: Adam A, Dixon AK, Gillard JH, Schaefer-Prokop CM, eds.
Grainger & Allison's Diagnostic Radiology: A Textbook of Medical Imaging
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 38.
Review Date 4/27/2023
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bone Cancer
Bone Diseases
Bone Infections
Fractures
Osteoarthritis
X-Rays