Amitriptyline and perphenazine overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Amitriptyline and perphenazine overdose
Amitriptyline and perphenazine overdose
Amitriptyline and perphenazine is a combination medicine. It is sometimes prescribed for people with depression, agitation, or anxiety.
Amitriptyline and perphenazine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an
overdose
, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Amitriptyline and perphenazine can be very harmful in large amounts.
Where Found
Medicines with this brand name contain amitriptyline and perphenazine:
Triptazine
Other medicines may also contain amitriptyline and perphenazine.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of an amitriptyline and perphenazine overdose in different parts of the body. These symptoms may occur more often or be more severe in people who also take certain other medicines that affect serotonin, a chemical in the brain.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Slowed, labored breathing
No breathing
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Hard to start urinating
, and urine stream may be weak
Inability to completely empty the bladder
EYES, EARS, NOSE, THROAT, AND MOUTH
Blurred vision
Dry mouth
Enlarged pupils
Eye pain in people at risk for a type of
glaucoma
Nasal congestion
Unpleasant taste in mouth
HEART AND BLOOD
Irregular heartbeat
Low blood pressure (severe)
Rapid heartbeat
Shock
MUSCLES AND JOINTS
Muscles are rigid
Muscle cramps
, spasms, or stiffness of the limbs
Stiff muscles in neck, face, or back
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation
Coma
(decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness)
Seizures
Delirium
Disorientation
Drowsiness
Lower than normal body temperature
Restlessness
Uncoordinated movement
Tremor
Weakness
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Change in menstrual patterns
SKIN
Itchy
skin
Rash
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Constipation
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.  This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Medicine called an antidote to reverse the effects of the poison and treat symptoms, such as sodium bicarbonate or lidocaine
Activated charcoal
Laxative
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a breathing machine (ventilator)
Outlook (Prognosis)
An overdose of amitriptyline and perphenazine can be very serious.
People who swallow too much of this medicine are almost always admitted to the hospital.
How well someone does depends on how much of the medicine was swallowed and how quickly treatment is given. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance of recovery. Complications such as heart rhythm disturbances, pneumonia, muscle damage from lying on a hard surface for a long period of time, or brain damage from lack of oxygen may result in permanent disability. Death can occur.
Alternative Names
Triptazine overdose
References
Aronson JK. Tricyclic antidepressants. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:146-169.
Huffman JC, Beach SR, Stern TA. Side effects of psychotropic medications. In: Stern TA, Fava M, Wilens TE, Rosenbaum JF, eds.
Massachusetts General Hospital Psychopharmacology and Neurotherapeutics
. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 12.
Levine MD, Ruha A-M. Antidepressants. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 141.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Antidepressants