Drowsiness: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Drowsiness
Drowsiness
Drowsiness refers to feeling more sleepy than normal during the day. People who are drowsy may fall asleep when they do not want to or at times which can lead to safety concerns.
Considerations
Excessive daytime sleepiness (without a known cause) may be a sign of a sleep disorder.
Depression
,
anxiety
,
stress
, and boredom can all contribute to excessive sleepiness. However, these conditions more often cause
fatigue
and apathy.
Causes
Drowsiness may be due to the following:
Long-term (chronic) pain
Diabetes
Having to work long hours or different shifts (nights, weekends)
Insomnia
and other problems falling or staying asleep
Changes in blood sodium levels (
hyponatremia
or hypernatremia)
Medicines (tranquilizers, sleeping pills, antihistamines, certain painkillers, some psychiatric drugs)
Not sleeping long enough
Sleep disorders (such as
sleep apnea
and
narcolepsy
)
Too much calcium in your blood (
hypercalcemia
)
Underactive thyroid (
hypothyroidism
)
Home Care
You can relieve drowsiness by treating the cause of the problem. First, determine whether your drowsiness is due to depression, anxiety, boredom, or stress. If you are not sure, talk with your health care provider.
For drowsiness due to medicines, talk to your provider about switching or stopping your medicines. But, DO NOT stop taking or change your medicine without first talking to your provider.
Do not drive when drowsy.
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will examine you to determine the cause of your drowsiness. You will be asked about your sleep patterns and health. Questions may include:
How well do you sleep?
How much do you sleep?
Do you snore?
Do you fall asleep during the day when you do not plan to nap (such as when watching TV or reading)? If so, do you awake feeling refreshed? How often does this happen?
Are you depressed, anxious, stressed, or bored?
What medicines do you take?
What have you done to try to relieve the drowsiness? How well did it work?
What other symptoms do you have?
Tests that may be done include:
Blood tests (such as a
CBC
and
blood differential
, blood sugar level, electrolytes, calcium, and thyroid hormone levels)
CT
or
MRI
scan of the head
Electroencephalogram
(EEG)
Sleep studies
Urine tests (such as a
urinalysis
)
Treatment depends on the cause of your drowsiness.
Alternative Names
Sleepiness - during the day; Hypersomnia; Somnolence
Images
Insomnia concerns
Irregular sleep
References
Avidan AY. Sleep and its disorders. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 101.
Mansukhani MP, Kolla BP, St. Louis EK. Sleep disorders. In: Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds.
Conn's Current Therapy 2023
. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier 2023:794-809.
Sharafkhaneh A, Hirshkowitz M. Evaluating sleepiness and fatigue. In: Kryger M, Roth T, Goldstein CA, Dement WC, eds.
Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 207.
Review Date 7/8/2023
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Sleep Disorders