Trazodone overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Trazodone overdose
Trazodone overdose
Trazodone is an antidepressant medicine. Sometimes, it is used as a sleep aid and to treat
agitation
in people with
dementia
. Trazodone overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual
overdose
. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Trazodone
Where Found
In the US, trazodone is sold as a generic prescription pill. Trazadone hydrochloride is the generic name of this drug.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of an overdose of trazodone in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Difficulty breathing
Stopped breathing
HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
Chest pain
Irregular heartbeat
Low blood pressure, sometimes leading to fainting
Slow heart rate
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Coma
(lack of responsiveness)
Dizziness
Drowsiness
Headache
Insomnia
Seizures
Lack of coordination
Tremor
OTHER
Abnormal erection that lasts for more than 4 hours and can cause permanent damage to the penis (priapism).
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. Call the poison control center. Do NOT make the person throw up unless the poison control center or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the medicine and the strength of the medicine (if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your
local poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline number will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. The person may receive:
Activated charcoal
Blood and urine tests
Breathing support, including oxygen and a tube through the mouth into the lungs
Chest x-ray
CT scan of the brain
ECG (
electrocardiogram
, or heart tracing)
Intravenous fluids (IV, through a vein)
Laxatives
Medicines to treat symptoms
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to empty the stomach (
gastric lavage
)
Outlook (Prognosis)
Death can result from an overdose, but this is rare. Long-term heart and breathing problems are also rare.
If breathing has been depressed for a long period before treatment, brain injury may occur.
Alternative Names
Trazadone hydrochloride
References
Aronson JK. Trazodone. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:120-123.
Levine M, Ruha A-M. Antidepressants. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 141.
Review Date 4/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Antidepressants