Cyanoacrylates poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Cyanoacrylates poisoning
Cyanoacrylates poisoning
Cyanoacrylate is a sticky substance found in many glues. Cyanoacrylate poisoning occurs when someone swallows this substance or gets it on their skin.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Cyanoacrylates are the harmful substances in these products.
Symptoms
The skin sticks together when these products get on the skin. They can cause
hives
and other types of skin irritation. Serious injury may occur if the product comes in contact with the eye.
Cyanoacrylates have medical value when used properly.
Home Care
Wash exposed areas with warm water right away. If the glue gets on the eyelids, try to keep the eyelids separated. If the eye becomes glued shut, get emergency medical care right away. If the eye is partially open, flush with cool water for 15 minutes.
Do not try to peel off the glue. It will come off naturally when sweat builds up under it and lifts it off.
If fingers or other skin surfaces are stuck together, use a gentle back and forth motion to try to separate them. Applying vegetable oil around the area may help separate the skin that is stuck together.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product
Time it was swallowed or touched the skin
Part of the body affected
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as needed.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on how much cyanoacrylate was swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
It should be possible to separate the skin that is stuck together. Most eyelids separate on their own in 1 to 4 days.
If this substance is stuck to the eyeball itself (not the eyelids), the surface of the eye can be damaged during attempts at removal or by rubbing the eyes. Abrasions or wounds on the cornea and permanent vision problems have been reported.
Alternative Names
Glue; Super Glue; Crazy Glue
References
Aronson JK. Cyanoacrylates. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:776.
Guluma K, Lee JE. Ophthalmology. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 57.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.