Multiple vitamin overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Multiple vitamin overdose
Multiple vitamin overdose
Multiple vitamin overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of multivitamin supplements. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an overdose, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Any ingredient in a multiple vitamin supplement can be toxic in large amounts, but the most serious risk comes from
iron
or calcium.
Additional risks are associated with large or toxic doses of calcium, vitamin D, and vitamin A.
Where Found
Many multivitamin supplements are sold over-the-counter (without a prescription).
Symptoms
Iron overdose may include vomiting, diarrhea (which may be bloody or dark), or weakness. People with severe overdoses may develop coma, low blood pressure, liver failure, lung injury, and death.
Calcium overdose can impair the functioning of the kidneys, increase the pH of the blood, and can cause nausea and vomiting, confusion or changes in thinking or mentation, itching, and in extreme cases irregular heartbeat.
Vitamin D overdose can contribute to high levels of calcium in the blood.
Vitamin A overdose can cause nausea and vomiting, dizziness, blurry vision.
Additional symptoms of a multivitamin overdose in different parts of the body may include:
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Cloudy urine
Frequent urination
Increased urine amount
EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT
Dry, cracking lips (from chronic overdose)
Eye irritation
Increased sensitivity of the eyes to light
HEART AND BLOOD
Irregular heartbeat
Rapid heartbeat
MUSCLES AND JOINTS
Bone pain
Joint pain
Muscle pain
Muscle weakness
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Confusion, mood changes
Convulsions
(seizures)
Fainting
Fatigue
Headache
Mental changes
Irritability
SKIN AND HAIR
Flushing
(reddened skin) from niacin (vitamin B3)
Dry, cracking skin
Itching
, burning skin, or rash
Yellow-orange areas of skin
Sensitivity to sun (more likely to sunburn)
Hair loss (from long-term overdose)
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Intestinal bleeding (from iron)
Appetite loss
Constipation (from iron or calcium)
Diarrhea, possibly bloody
Nausea and vomiting
Stomach pain
Weight loss (from long-term overdose)
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care professional tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known)
Time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your
local poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
Your health care provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated. In severe cases, you may be admitted to the hospital.
Tests may include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain for neurologic symptoms
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Activated charcoal
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Fluids through the vein (IV)
Laxative
Medicines to treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
If medical treatment is quickly received, people who have iron and calcium overdoses usually recover. Overdoses of iron that cause coma or low blood pressure can sometimes be fatal. Iron overdoses can have long-term consequences to the intestines and liver, including intestinal scarring and liver failure.
Niacin flush (vitamin B3) is uncomfortable, but lasts only 2 to 8 hours. Vitamins A and D may cause symptoms when large doses are taken each day, but a one large dose of these vitamins is rarely harmful. B vitamins usually do not cause symptoms.
Images
Vitamin safety
References
Aronson JK. Vitamins. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:435-438.
Theobald JL, Mycyk MB. Iron and heavy metals.  In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 146.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.