Cardiac ablation procedures : MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Cardiac ablation procedures
Cardiac ablation procedures
Cardiac ablation is a procedure that is used to scar small areas in your heart that may be involved in your
heart rhythm problems
. This can prevent the abnormal electrical signals or rhythms from moving through your heart.
During the procedure, small wires called electrodes are placed inside your heart to measure your heart's electrical activity. When the source of the problem is found, the tissue causing the problem is destroyed.
Description
There are two methods for performing cardiac ablation:
Radiofrequency ablation uses heat energy to eliminate the problem area.
Cryoablation uses very cold temperatures.
The type of procedure you have will depend on what kind of abnormal heart rhythm you have.
Cardiac ablation procedures are done in a hospital laboratory by a team of trained staff. This includes cardiologists (heart doctors), technicians, and nurses. The setting is safe and controlled so your risk is as low as possible.
You will be given medicine (a sedative) before the procedure to help you relax.
The skin on your neck, arm, or groin will be cleaned well and made numb with an anesthetic.
Next, the cardiologist will make a small cut in the skin.
A small, flexible tube (catheter) will be inserted through this cut into one of the blood vessels in the area. The cardiologist will use live x-ray images to carefully guide the catheter up into your heart.
Sometimes more than one catheter is needed.
Once the catheter is in place, your cardiologist will place small electrodes in different areas of your heart.
These electrodes are connected to monitors that allow the cardiologist to tell what area in your heart is causing problems with your heart rhythm. In most cases, there are one or more specific areas.
Once the source of the problem has been found, one of the catheter lines is used to send electrical (or sometimes cold) energy to the problem area.
This creates a small scar that causes the heart rhythm problem to stop.
Catheter ablation is a long procedure. It can last 4 or more hours. During the procedure your heart will be monitored closely. A health care team member may ask you if you are having symptoms at different times during the procedure. Symptoms you may feel are:
A brief burning when medicines are injected
faster or stronger heartbeat
Lightheadedness
Burning when the electrical energy is used
Why the Procedure is Performed
Cardiac ablation is used to treat certain heart rhythm problems that medicines are not controlling. These problems may be dangerous if they are not treated.
Common symptoms of heart rhythm problems may include:
Chest pain
Fainting
Slow or fast heartbeat (palpitations)
Lightheadedness, dizziness
Paleness
Shortness of breath
Skipping beats -- changes in the pattern of the pulse
Sweating
Some heart rhythm problems are:
AV nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT)
Associated with an accessory pathway, such as
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Atrial fibrillation
Atrial flutter
Ventricular tachycardia
Risks
Catheter ablation is generally safe. Talk with your cardiologist about these rare complications:
Bleeding or blood pooling where the catheter is inserted
Blood clot
that goes to arteries in your leg, heart, or brain
Damage to the artery where the catheter is inserted
Damage to heart valves
Damage to the coronary arteries (blood vessels that carry blood to your heart)
Esophageal atrial
fistula
(a connection that forms between your esophagus and part of your heart)
Fluid around the heart (
cardiac tamponade
)
Heart attack
Vagal or phrenic nerve damage
Before the Procedure
Always tell your health care providers what medicines you are taking, even medicines or herbs you bought without a prescription.
During the days before the procedure:
Ask your cardiologist which medicines you should still take on the day of the surgery.
Tell your cardiologist if you are taking aspirin, clopidogrel (Plavix), prasugrel (Effient), ticagrelor (Brilinta), warfarin (Coumadin), or another blood thinner such as apixaban (Eliquis), rivaroxaban (Xarelto), dabigatran (Pradaxa) and edoxaban (Savaysa).
If you smoke, stop before the procedure. Ask your provider for help if you need it.
Tell your cardiologist if you have a
cold
,
flu
,
fever
,
herpes
breakout, or other illness.
On the day of the procedure:
You will most often be asked not to drink or eat anything after midnight the night before your procedure.
Take the medicines your cardiologist has told you to take with a small sip of water.
You will be told when to arrive at the hospital.
After the Procedure
Pressure to reduce bleeding is put on the area where the catheters were inserted into your body. You will be kept in bed for at least 1 hour. You may need to stay in bed for up to 5 or 6 hours. Your heart rhythm will be checked during this time.
Your cardiologist will decide whether you can go home on the same day, or if you will need to stay in the hospital overnight for continued heart monitoring. You will need someone to drive you home after your procedure.
For 2 or 3 days after your procedure, you may have these symptoms:
Fatigue
Achy feeling in your chest
Skipped heartbeats or times when your heartbeat is very fast or irregular
Your cardiologist may keep you on your medicines, or give you new ones that help control your heart rhythm.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Success rates are different depending on what type of heart rhythm problem is being treated.
Alternative Names
Catheter ablation; Radiofrequency catheter ablation; Cryoablation - cardiac ablation; AV nodal reentrant tachycardia - cardiac ablation; AVNRT - cardiac ablation; Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome - cardiac ablation; Atrial fibrillation - cardiac ablation; Atrial flutter - cardiac ablation; Ventricular tachycardia - cardiac ablation; VT - cardiac ablation; Arrhythmia - cardiac ablation; Abnormal heart rhythm - cardiac ablation
Patient Instructions
Angina - discharge
Angina - when you have chest pain
Antiplatelet medicines - P2Y12 inhibitors
Aspirin and heart disease
Atrial fibrillation - discharge
Butter, margarine, and cooking oils
Cholesterol and lifestyle
Controlling your high blood pressure
Dietary fats explained
Fast food tips
Heart attack - discharge
Heart disease - risk factors
Heart failure - discharge
Heart pacemaker - discharge
How to read food labels
Low-salt diet
Mediterranean diet
Images
Conduction system of the heart
References
Calkins H, Hindricks G, Cappato R, et al. 2017 HRS/EHRA/ECAS/APHRS/SOLAECE expert consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation.
Heart Rhythm.
2017;14(10):e275-e444. PMID: 28506916
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28506916/
.
Mehta NK, Haines DE. Cryoablation and other radiofrequency alternatives. In Jalife J, Stevenson WG, eds.
Zipes and Jalife's Cardiac Electrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 131.
Miller JM, Ellenbogen KA. Therapy for cardiac arrhythmias. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine.
12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 64.
Qian PC, Sauer WH. Radiofrequency ablation. In: Jalife J, Stevenson WG, eds.
Zipes and Jalife's Cardiac Electrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 130.
Review Date 7/14/2024
Updated by: Michael A. Chen, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Arrhythmia
Atrial Fibrillation