Factor XII assay: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Factor XII assay
Factor XII assay
The factor XII assay is a blood test to measure the activity of factor XII. This is one of the proteins in the body that helps the blood clot.
How the Test is Performed
blood sample
is needed.
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is needed.
How the Test will Feel
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or slight bruising. This soon goes away.
Why the Test is Performed
Your health care provider may want you to have this test if you had abnormal results on the
partial thromboplastin time (PTT) blood-clotting test
. You may also need the test if a family member is known to have
factor XII deficiency
.
Normal Results
A normal value is 50% to 200% of the lab control or reference value.
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different labs. Some labs use different measurements or may test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Decreased factor XII activity may indicate:
Factor XII deficiency (a lack of blood clotting factor XII that does not increase the risk for bleeding).  ). It can be due to an inherited condition associated with a variant gene.
Liver disease
.
Risks
There is little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one person to another, and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Multiple punctures to locate veins
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Alternative Names
Hageman factor assay
References
Gailani D, Benjamin FT, Wheeler AP. Rare coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Pai M, Moffat KA. Laboratory evaluation of hemostatic and thrombotic disorders. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 127.
Ragni MV. Coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 160.
Sarode R, Kessler CM. Coagulation and fibrinolysis. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods.
24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 40.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bleeding Disorders