Cystitis - noninfectious: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Cystitis - noninfectious
Cystitis - noninfectious
Cystitis is a problem in which pain, pressure, or burning in the bladder is present. Most often,
this problem is caused by germs such as bacteria
. Cystitis is called noninfectious when there is no infection.
Causes
The exact cause of noninfectious cystitis is often not known. It is more common in women than men.
The problem has been linked to:
Use of baths and feminine hygiene sprays
Use of spermicide jellies, gels, foams, and sponges
Radiation therapy
to the pelvis area
Certain types of
chemotherapy
drugs
History of severe or repeated bladder infections
Certain foods, such as spicy or acidic foods, tomatoes, artificial sweeteners, caffeine, chocolate, and alcohol, can cause bladder symptoms.
Stress may also make symptoms worse, but stress does not cause symptoms.
Symptoms
Common symptoms include:
Pressure or pain in the lower pelvis
Painful urination
Frequent need to urinate
Urgent need to urinate
Problems holding urine
Need to urinate at night
Abnormal urine color
, cloudy urine
Blood in the urine
Foul or strong urine odor
Other symptoms may include:
Pain during sexual intercourse
Scrotum,
penile, or vaginal pain
Fatigue
Exams and Tests
urinalysis
may reveal red blood cells (RBCs) and some white blood cells (WBCs). Urine may be examined under a microscope to look for cancerous cells.
urine culture (clean catch)
is done to look for a bacterial infection.
cystoscopy
(use of lighted instrument to look inside the bladder) may be done if you have:
Symptoms related to radiation therapy or chemotherapy
Symptoms that do not get better with treatment
Blood in the urine
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to manage your symptoms.
This may include:
Medicines to help your bladder relax. They can reduce the strong urge to urinate or need to urinate frequently. These are called anticholinergic medicines. Possible side effects include increased
heart rate
, low blood pressure, dry mouth, and constipation. Another class of medicine is known as a beta 3 receptor blocker. A possible side effect can be an increase in blood pressure but this does not occur often.
A medicine called phenazopyridine (Pyridium) to help relieve pain and burning with urination.
Medicines to help reduce pain.
Surgery is rarely done. It may be performed if a person has symptoms that do not go away with other treatments, trouble passing urine, or blood in the urine.
Other things that may help include:
Avoiding foods and fluids that irritate the bladder. These include spicy and acidic foods as well as alcohol, citrus juices, and caffeine, and foods that contain them.
Performing bladder training exercises to help you schedule times to try to urinate and to delay urination at all other times. One method is to force yourself to delay urinating despite the urge to urinate in between these times. As you become better at waiting this long, slowly increase the time intervals by 15 minutes. Try to reach a goal of urinating every 3 to 4 hours.
Avoiding pelvic muscle strengthening exercises called
Kegel exercises
.
Pelvic floor physical therapy to relieve pain in the abdominal and pelvic areas and to release tight and scarred tissues.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Most cases of cystitis are uncomfortable, but the symptoms most often get better over time. Symptoms can improve if you are able to identify and avoid food triggers.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Ulceration of bladder wall
Painful sex
Sleep loss
Depression
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if:
You have symptoms of cystitis
You have been diagnosed with cystitis and your symptoms get worse, or you have new symptoms, especially
fever
, blood in the urine, back or
flank pain
, and
vomiting
Prevention
Avoid products that may irritate the bladder such as:
Bubble baths
Feminine hygiene sprays
Tampons (especially scented products)
Spermicidal jellies
If you need to use such products, try to find those that do not cause irritation for you.
Alternative Names
Abacterial cystitis; Radiation cystitis; Chemical cystitis; Urethral syndrome - acute; Bladder pain syndrome; Painful bladder disease complex; Dysuria - noninfectious cystitis; Frequent urination - noninfectious cystitis; Painful urination - noninfectious; Interstitial cystitis
Images
Female urinary tract
References
American Urological Association website. Diagnosis and Treatment Interstitial Cystitis/Bladder Pain Syndrome (2022).
www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/diagnosis-and-treatment-interstitial-cystitis/bladder-pain-syndrome-(2022)
. Accessed June 25, 2024.
Clemens JQ, Erickson DR, Varela NP, Lai HH. Diagnosis and treatment of interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome.
J Urol
. 2022; 208(1):34-42. PMID: 35536143
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35536143/
.
Moldwin RM, Hanno PM. Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome and related disorders. In: Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA, eds.
Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 57.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases website. Interstitial cystitis (painful bladder syndrome).
www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/urologic-diseases/interstitial-cystitis-painful-bladder-syndrome
. Updated July 2017. Accessed June 6, 2024.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Sovrin M. Shah, MD, Associate Professor, Department of Urology, The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bladder Diseases