Parathyroid hyperplasia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Parathyroid hyperplasia
Parathyroid hyperplasia
Parathyroid hyperplasia is the enlargement of all 4 parathyroid glands. The parathyroid glands are located in the neck, near or attached to the back side of the thyroid gland.
Causes
The parathyroid glands help regulate calcium absorption, use, and removal by the body. They do this by producing parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH helps regulate calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D levels in the blood and bone. It is important for healthy bones.
Parathyroid hyperplasia may occur in people without a family history of the disease, or as part of 3 inherited syndromes:
Multiple endocrine neoplasia I (MEN I)
MEN IIA
Isolated familial
hyperparathyroidism
In people with an inherited syndrome, a changed (variant) gene is passed down through the family. You only need to get the gene from one parent to develop the condition.
In MEN I, problems in the parathyroid glands occur, as well as tumors in the pituitary gland and pancreas.
In MEN IIA, overactivity of the parathyroid glands occurs, along with tumors in the adrenal or thyroid gland.
Parathyroid hyperplasia that isn't part of an inherited syndrome is much more common. It occurs due to other medical conditions. The most common conditions that can cause parathyroid hyperplasia are chronic kidney disease and chronic vitamin D deficiency. In both cases, the parathyroid glands become enlarged because vitamin D and calcium levels are too low.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Bone fractures
or bone pain
Constipation
Lack of energy
Muscle pain
Nausea
Exams and Tests
Blood tests will be done to check levels of:
Calcium
Phosphorus
Magnesium
PTH
Vitamin D
Creatinine, BUN (
kidney function tests
)
24-hour urine test - done to determine how much calcium is being filtered out of the body into the urine
Alkaline phosphatase
Other tests include:
Bone density exam
Kidney
ultrasound
or
CT scan
(may show kidney stones or calcification)
Kidney
x-rays
(may show kidney stones)
MRI
Neck ultrasound
Sestamibi neck scan (to identify the location of the parathyroid adenoma)
Treatment
If parathyroid hyperplasia is due to kidney disease or low vitamin D level and it is found early, your health care provider may recommend that you take vitamin D, vitamin D-like medicines, and other medicines.
Surgery is usually done when the parathyroid glands are producing too much PTH and causing symptoms. Usually 3 1/2 glands are removed. The remaining tissue may be implanted in the forearm or neck muscle. This allows easy access to the tissue if symptoms come back. This tissue is implanted to prevent the body from having too little PTH, which can result in low calcium levels (from
hypoparathyroidism
).
Outlook (Prognosis)
After surgery, a high blood calcium level may persist or return. Surgery can sometimes cause hypoparathyroidism, which makes blood calcium level too low.
Possible Complications
Parathyroid hyperplasia can cause
hyperparathyroidism
, which leads to an increase in blood calcium level.
Complications include
increased calcium in the kidneys
, which can cause
kidney stones
,  and
osteitis fibrosa cystica
(a softened, weak area in the bones).
Surgery can sometimes damage the nerves that control the vocal cords. This can affect the strength of your voice.
Complications may result from the other tumors that are part of the MEN syndromes.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You have any symptoms of
hypercalcemia
You have a family history of a MEN syndrome
Prevention
If you have a family history of the MEN syndromes, you may want to have genetic screening to check for the variant gene. Those who have the variant gene may have routine screening tests to detect any early symptoms.
Alternative Names
Enlarged parathyroid glands; Osteoporosis - parathyroid hyperplasia; Bone thinning - parathyroid hyperplasia; Osteopenia - parathyroid hyperplasia; High calcium level - parathyroid hyperplasia; Chronic kidney disease - parathyroid hyperplasia; Kidney failure - parathyroid hyperplasia; Overactive parathyroid - parathyroid hyperplasia
Images
Endocrine glands
Parathyroid glands
References
Reid LM, Kamani D, Randolph GW. Management of parathyroid disorders. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 123.
Thakker RV. The parathyroid glands, hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 227.
Walker MD, Bilezikian JP. Primary hyperparathyroidism. In: Robertson RP, ed.
DeGroot's Endocrinology
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 54.
Review Date 5/20/2024
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Parathyroid Disorders