Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS): MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, is a disease of the nerve cells in the brain, brain stem and spinal cord that control voluntary muscle movement.
ALS is also known as Lou Gehrig disease.
Causes
One in 10 cases of ALS is due to a genetic variant. The cause is unknown in most other cases.
In ALS, motor nerve cells (neurons) waste away or die, and can no longer send messages to muscles. This eventually leads to muscle weakening, twitching, and an inability to move the arms, legs, and body. The condition continues to get worse. When the muscles in the chest area stop working, it becomes hard or impossible to breathe.
ALS affects approximately 7 out of every 100,000 people worldwide.
Having a family member who has a hereditary form of the disease is a risk factor for ALS. Other risks include military service. The reasons for this are unclear, but it may have to do with environmental exposure to toxins.
Symptoms
Symptoms usually do not develop until after age 50, but they can start in younger people. People with ALS have a loss of muscle strength and coordination that eventually gets worse and makes it impossible for them to do routine tasks such as going up steps, getting out of a chair, or swallowing.
Weakness can first affect the arms or legs, or the ability to breathe or swallow. As the disease gets worse, more muscle groups develop problems.
ALS does not affect the senses (sight, smell, taste, hearing, touch). Most people are able to think normally, although a small number develop dementia, causing problems with memory.
Muscle weakness starts in one body part, such as the arm or hand, and slowly gets worse until it leads to the following:
Difficulty lifting, climbing stairs, and walking
Difficulty breathing
Difficulty swallowing -- choking easily, drooling, or gagging
Head drop due to weakness of the neck muscles
Speech problems, such as a slow or abnormal speech pattern (slurring of words)
Voice changes, hoarseness
Other findings include:
Depression
Changing expressions of emotions (emotional lability)
Muscle cramps
Muscle stiffness, called spasticity
Muscle contractions
, called fasciculations
Weight loss
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms.
The physical exam may show:
Weakness, often beginning in one area of the body
Muscle tremors, spasms, twitching, or loss of muscle tissue
Twitching of the tongue (common)
Abnormal reflexes
Stiff or clumsy walk
Decreased or increased reflexes at the joints
Difficulty controlling crying or laughing (sometimes called emotional incontinence)
Loss of gag reflex
Tests that may be done include:
Blood tests to check for other conditions
Breathing test to see if lung muscles are affected
Cervical spine CT
or
MRI
to be sure there is no disease or injury to the neck, which can mimic ALS
Electromyography
(EMG) to see which nerves or muscles do not work properly
Genetic testing, especially if there is a family history of ALS
Head CT
or
MRI
to rule out other conditions
Swallowing studies
Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
Treatment
There is no known cure for ALS. Two medicines are available that help slow the progression of symptoms and may help people live slightly longer:
Riluzole (Rilutek)
Edaravone (Radicava)
Treatments to control other symptoms include:
Baclofen or diazepam for
spasticity
that interferes with daily activities
Trihexyphenidyl or amitriptyline for people with problems swallowing their own saliva
Trials of gene therapy are now underway for some specific hereditary causes.
Physical therapy, rehabilitation, use of braces or a wheelchair, or other measures may be needed to help with muscle function and general health. Ongoing oversight by a physical medicine provider is helpful, given continuously changing symptoms.
People with ALS tend to lose weight. The illness itself increases the need for food and calories. At the same time, problems with choking and swallowing make it hard to eat enough. To help with feeding, a tube may be placed into the stomach. A dietitian who specializes in ALS can give advice on healthy eating.
Breathing devices include machines that are considered non-invasive (such as CPAP or BiPAP). Others require tube in the trachea (invasive ventilation).
Medicine for depression may be needed if a person with ALS is diagnosed with depression. They also should discuss their wishes regarding artificial ventilation with their families and providers.
Support Groups
Emotional support is vital in coping with the disorder, because mental functioning is not affected.
Groups
such as the ALS Association may be available to help people who are coping with the disorder.
Support for people who are caring for someone with ALS is also available, and may be very helpful.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Over time, people with ALS lose the ability to function and care for themselves. Death often occurs within 3 to 5 years of diagnosis. About 1 in 4 people survive for more than 5 years after diagnosis. Some people live much longer, but they typically need help breathing from a ventilator or other device.
Possible Complications
Complications of ALS include:
Breathing in food or fluid (
aspiration
)
Loss of ability to care for self
Lung failure
Pneumonia
Pressure sores
Weight loss
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You have symptoms of ALS, particularly if you have a family history of the disorder
You or someone else has been diagnosed with ALS and symptoms get worse or new symptoms develop
Increased difficulty swallowing, difficulty breathing, and episodes of
apnea
are symptoms that require immediate attention.
Prevention
You may want to see a
genetic counselor
if you have a family history of ALS.
Alternative Names
Lou Gehrig disease; ALS; Upper and lower motor neuron disease; Motor neuron disease
Images
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
References
Fearon C, Murray B, Mitsumoto H. Disorders of upper and lower motor neurons. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 97.
Shaw PJ, Cudkowicz ME. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other motor neuron diseases. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 387.
Review Date 6/13/2024
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis