Mucormycosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Mucormycosis
Mucormycosis
Mucormycosis is a fungal infection of the sinuses, brain, or lungs. It occurs in some people with a weakened immune system.
Causes
Mucormycosis is caused by different kinds of fungi often found in decaying organic matter. These include spoiled bread, fruit, and vegetables, as well as soil and compost piles. Most people come in contact with the fungus in the environment.
People with a weakened immune system are more likely to develop mucormycosis. These include people with any of the following conditions:
AIDS
Burns
Diabetes
(usually poorly controlled)
Leukemia
and
lymphoma
Long-term steroid use
Metabolic acidosis
Poor nutrition (malnutrition)
Use of some medicines that suppress the immune system
Mucormycosis may involve:
A sinus and brain infection called rhinocerebral infection:
It may start as a sinus infection, and then lead to the swelling of the nerves that come from the brain. It may also cause blood clots that block vessels to the brain.
A lung infection called pulmonary mucormycosis:
Pneumonia that gets worse quickly and may spread to the chest cavity, heart, and brain.
Other parts of the body:
Mucormycosis of the gastrointestinal tract, skin, and kidneys.
Symptoms
Symptoms of rhinocerebral mucormycosis include:
Eyes that swell and stick out (protrude)
Dark scabbing in nasal cavities
Fever
Headache
Mental status changes
Redness of skin above sinuses
Sinus pain or congestion
Symptoms of lung (pulmonary) mucormycosis include:
Cough
Coughing blood (occasionally)
Fever
Shortness of breath
Symptoms of gastrointestinal mucormycosis include:
Abdominal pain
Blood in the stools
Diarrhea
Vomiting blood
Symptoms of kidney (renal) mucormycosis include:
Fever
Pain in the upper abdomen or flank
Symptoms of skin (cutaneous) mucormycosis include a single, sometimes painful, hardened area of skin that may have a blackened center.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine you. See an ear-nose-throat (ENT) specialist if you are having sinus problems.
Testing depends on your symptoms, but may include these imaging tests:
CT scans
MRI
scans
biopsy
must be done to diagnose mucormycosis. A biopsy is the removal of a small piece of tissue for lab examination to identify the fungus and invasion into host tissue.
Treatment
Surgery should be done right away to remove all dead and infected tissues. Surgery can lead to disfiguration because it may involve removal of the palate, parts of the nose, or parts of the eye. But, without such aggressive surgery, chances of survival are greatly decreased.
You will also receive antifungal medicine, usually amphotericin B, through a vein. After the infection is under control, you may be switched to a different medicine such as posaconazole or isavuconazole.
If you have diabetes, it will be important to get your blood sugar in the normal range.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Mucormycosis has a very high death rate, even when aggressive surgery is done. The risk of death depends on the area of the body involved and your overall health.
Possible Complications
These complications may occur:
Blindness (if the optic nerve is involved)
Clotting or blockage of brain or lung blood vessels
Death
Nerve damage
When to Contact a Medical Professional
People with weakened immune systems and immune disorders (including diabetes) should seek medical attention if they develop:
Fever
Headache
Sinus pain
Eye swelling
Any of the other symptoms listed above
Prevention
Because the fungi that cause mucormycosis are widespread, the best way to prevent this infection is to improve control of the illnesses associated with mucormycosis.
Alternative Names
Fungal infection - mucormycosis; Zygomycosis
Images
Fungus
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Mucormycosis. Mucormycosis basics.
www.cdc.gov/mucormycosis/about/
. Updated April 24, 2024. Accessed November 25, 2024.
Kontoyiannis DP, Ostrosky-Zeichner L. Mucormycosis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine.
27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 312.
Kontoyiannis DP, Lewis RE. Agents of mucormycosis and entomophthoramycosis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases.
9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 258
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Fungal Infections