Porphyrins urine test: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Porphyrins urine test
Porphyrins urine test
Porphyrins are natural chemicals in the body that help form many important substances in the body. One of these is hemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen in the blood.
Porphyrins can be measured in the urine or
blood
. This article discusses the urine test.
How the Test is Performed
After you provide a urine sample, it is tested in the lab. This is called a random urine sample.
If needed, your health care provider may ask you to
collect your urine at home over 24 hours
. This is called a 24-hour urine sample. Your provider will tell you how to do this. Follow instructions exactly so that the results are accurate.
How to Prepare for the Test
Your provider may tell you to temporarily stop taking medicines that may affect the test results. These may include:
Antibiotics and anti-fungal medicines
Anti-anxiety medicines
Birth control pills
Diabetes medicines
Pain medicines
Sleep medicines
Do not stop taking any medicine without first talking to your provider.
How the Test will Feel
This test involves only normal urination and there is no discomfort.
Why the Test is Performed
Your provider will order this test if you have signs of
porphyria
or other disorders that can cause abnormal urine porphyrins.
Normal Results
Normal results vary depending on the type of porphyrin tested. In general, for a 24-hour urine test of total porphyrins, the range is about 20 to 120  µg/L (25 to 144 nmol/L).
Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different lab. Some labs use different measurements or may test different specimens. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
What Abnormal Results Mean
Abnormal results may be due to:
Liver cancer
Hepatitis
Lead poisoning
Porphyria (several types)
Risks
There are no risks with this test.
Alternative Names
Urine uroporphyrin; Urine coproporphyrin; Porphyria - uroporphyrin
Images
Female urinary tract
Male urinary tract
Porphyrin urine test
References
American Porphyria Foundation website. Tests for porphyria diagnosis.
porphyriafoundation.org/for-patients/about-porphyria/testing-for-porphyria/tests-for-porphyria-diagnosis/
. Accessed May 2, 2025.
Fuller SJ, Wiley JS. Heme biosynthesis and its disorders: porphyrias and sideroblastic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 39.
Hift RJ. The porphyrias. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 194.
Riley RS, McPherson RA. Basic examination of urine. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 29.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Porphyria