Laser surgery for the skin: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Laser surgery for the skin
Laser surgery for the skin
Laser surgery uses laser energy to treat the skin. Laser surgery can be used to treat skin diseases or cosmetic concerns such as sunspots or
wrinkles
.
Description
A laser is a light beam that can be focused on a very small area. The laser heats specific cells in the area being treated until they burst.
There are several types of lasers. Each laser has specific uses. The color of the light beam used is directly related to the type of surgery being performed and the color of the tissue being treated.
Why the Procedure is Performed
Laser surgery can be used to:
Remove
warts
,
moles
, sunspots, and tattoos
Reduce skin wrinkles, scars, and other skin blemishes
Remove dilated blood vessels and redness
Remove hair
Remove skin cells that could turn into cancer
Shrink
surface leg veins
Improve skin texture and
cellulite
Improve
loose skin from aging
Risks
Possible risks of laser surgery include:
Pain, bruising, or swelling
Blisters
,
burns
, or scarring
Infections
Discoloration of the skin
Cold sores
Problem not going away
Most laser surgery for the skin is done while you are awake. Talk to your health care provider about the risks of laser surgery.
After the Procedure
The success of laser surgery depends on the condition being treated. Talk to your provider about what you can expect.
Also discuss with your provider, skin care following treatment. You may need to keep your skin moisturized and out of the sun.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The recovery time depends on the type of treatment and your overall health. Ask your provider before treatment how much recovery time you will need. Also ask about how many treatments you'll need to achieve your goal.
Alternative Names
Surgery using a laser
References
James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Cutaneous laser surgery. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds.
Andrews' Diseases of the Skin
. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 38.
O'Connor K, Dover JS. Understanding lasers, light sources, and other energy-based technology. In: Tanzi EL, Dover JS, eds.
Procedures in Cosmetic Dermatology: Lasers, Lights and Energy Devices
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 1.
Review Date 10/14/2024
Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Surgery