Cryptosporidium enteritis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Cryptosporidium enteritis
Cryptosporidium enteritis
Cryptosporidium enteritis is an infection of the small intestine that causes
diarrhea
. The parasite cryptosporidium causes this infection.
Causes
Cryptosporidium has recently been recognized as a cause of diarrhea worldwide in all age groups. It has a greater effect on people with a weakened immune system, including:
People who take medicines to suppress their immune system
People with HIV/AIDS
Transplant recipients
In these groups, this infection is not just bothersome, but can lead to severe and life-threatening loss of muscle and body mass (wasting) and
malnutrition
.
The major risk factor is drinking water contaminated with stool (feces). People at higher risk include:
Animal handlers
People who are in close contact with infected people
Young children
Outbreaks have been linked to:
Drinking from contaminated public water supplies
Drinking unpasteurized cider
Swimming in contaminated pools and lakes
Some outbreaks have been very large.
Symptoms
Symptoms of infection include:
Abdominal cramping
Diarrhea, which is often watery, non-bloody, large-volume, and occurs many times a day
General sick feeling (
malaise
)
Malnutrition and weight loss (in severe and prolonged cases)
Nausea
Exams and Tests
These tests may be done:
Antibody test to see if cryptosporidium is in the stool
Intestinal biopsy (rare)
Stool exam with special techniques (AFB staining)
Stool exam
using a microscope to look for the parasites and their eggs
Treatment
There are several treatments for cryptosporidium enteritis.
The best approach is to improve immune function in people who have a weakened immune system. In people with HIV/AIDS, this can be done by using HIV-antiviral medicines. Using this type of treatment can lead to a complete remission of cryptosporidium enteritis.
Medicines such as nitazoxanide have been used in children and adults. Other medicines that are sometimes used include:
Nitazoxanide
Paromomycin
These medicines often help only for a little while. It is common for the infection to return.
Outlook (Prognosis)
In healthy people, the infection will clear up, but it can last up to a month. In people with a
weakened immune system
, long-term diarrhea may cause weight loss and malnutrition.
Possible Complications
These complications can occur:
Inflammation of a bile duct
Inflammation of the gallbladder
Inflammation of the liver (
hepatitis
)
Malabsorption
(not enough nutrients being absorbed from the intestinal tract)
Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis)
Loss of body mass that causes extreme thinness and weakness (wasting syndrome)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you develop watery diarrhea that does not go away within a few days, especially if you have a weakened immune system.
Prevention
Proper sanitation and hygiene, including handwashing, are important measures for preventing this illness.
Certain water filters can also reduce risk by filtering out the cryptosporidium eggs. However, the pores of the filter must be smaller than 1 micron to be effective. If you have a weakened immune system, ask your provider if you need to boil your water.
Alternative Names
Cryptosporidiosis
Images
Cryptosporidium - organism
Digestive system organs
References
Huston CD. Intestinal protozoa. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 113.
Warren CA, Lima AAM. Cryptosporidiosis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 321.
White AC. Cryptosporidiosis (Cryptosporidium species). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 282.
Review Date 3/16/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Cryptosporidiosis