Erysipeloid: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Erysipeloid
Erysipeloid
Erysipeloid is a rare and acute infection of the skin caused by a specific type of bacteria.
Causes
The bacteria that cause erysipeloid are called
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
. This type of bacteria may be found in fish, birds, mammals, and shellfish. Erysipeloid usually affects people who work with these animals (such as farmers, butchers, cooks, grocers, fishermen, or veterinarians). Infection results when the bacteria enters the skin through small breaks.
Symptoms
Symptoms may develop in 2 to 7 days after bacteria enter the skin. Usually, the fingers and hands are affected. But any exposed area of the body can get infected if there is a break in the skin. Symptoms may include:
Bright red skin in the infected area
Swelling of the area
Throbbing pain with itching or burning sensation
Fluid-filled
blisters
Low fever if the infection spreads
Swollen lymph nodes
(sometimes)
The infection may spread to other fingers. It usually doesn't spread past the wrist.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will examine you. Your provider can often make the diagnosis by looking at the infected skin and by asking how your symptoms started.
Tests that may be done to confirm the diagnosis include:
Skin biopsy
and
culture
to check for the bacteria
Blood tests to check for bacteria if the infection has spread
Treatment
Antibiotics, especially penicillin, are very effective to treat this condition.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Erysipeloid may get better on its own. It rarely spreads. If it does spread, the lining of the heart can become infected. This condition is called
endocarditis
.
Prevention
Using gloves while handling or preparing fish or meat can prevent the infection.
Alternative Names
Erysipelothricosis - erysipeloid; Skin infection - erysipeloid; Cellulitis - erysipeloid; Erysipeloid of Rosenbach; Diamond skin disease; Erysipelas
References
Dinulos JGH. Bacterial infections. In: Dinulos JGH, ed.
Habif's Clinical Dermatology
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 9.
Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al. Cutaneous bacterial infections. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 706.
McLarney RM, Sommer LL, Reboli AC, Heymann WR. Bacterial diseases. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds.
Dermatology
. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 74.
Review Date 10/13/2024
Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bacterial Infections
Rashes