Narcissistic personality disorder: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Narcissistic personality disorder
Narcissistic personality disorder
Narcissistic personality disorder is a mental condition in which a person has:
An excessive sense of self-importance
An extreme preoccupation with themselves
A lack of empathy for others
Causes
The cause of this disorder is unknown. Early life experiences, such as insensitive parenting, are thought to play a role in developing this disorder.
Symptoms
A person with this disorder may:
React to criticism with rage, shame, or humiliation
Take advantage of other people to achieve his or her own goals
Have excessive feelings of self-importance
Exaggerate achievements and talents
Be preoccupied with fantasies of success, power, beauty, intelligence, or ideal love
Have unreasonable expectations of favorable treatment
Need constant attention and admiration
Disregard the feelings of others, and have little ability to feel empathy
Have obsessive self-interest
Pursue mainly selfish goals
Exams and Tests
Narcissistic personality disorder is diagnosed based on a psychological evaluation. The health care provider will consider how long and how severe the person's symptoms are.
Treatment
Talk therapy may help the person relate to other people in a more positive and compassionate way.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Outcome of treatment depends on the severity of the disorder and how willing the person is to change.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Alcohol
overuse or illegal
drug use
Mood and anxiety disorders
Relationship, work, and family problems
Alternative Names
Personality disorder - borderline; Narcissism
References
American Psychiatric Association. Narcissistic personality disorder.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision
(DSM-5-TR), Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association Publishing; 2022.
Blais MA, Rivas-Vazquez R, Ruchensky JR, Stein MB. Personality and personality disorders. In: Stern TA, Wilens TE, Fava M, eds.
Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 37.
Review Date 7/17/2024
Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Personality Disorders