Polycythemia vera: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Polycythemia vera
Polycythemia vera
Polycythemia vera (PV) is a bone marrow disease that leads to an abnormal increase in the number of blood cells. The red blood cells are the most affected blood cell type.
Causes
PV is a disorder of the bone marrow. It mainly causes too many red blood cells to be produced. The numbers of white blood cells and platelets may also be higher than normal.
PV is a rare disorder that occurs more often in men than in women. It is not usually seen in people under age 40. The problem is often linked to a variant gene called
JAK2
V617F. The cause of this variant gene is unknown. This variant gene is not an inherited disorder.
Symptoms
In people with PV, there are too many red blood cells in the blood. This results in thicker blood, which can't flow through small blood vessels normally, leading to symptoms such as:
Trouble breathing when lying down
Dizziness
Feeling tired all the time
Full feeling in the left upper abdomen (due to enlarged spleen)
Headache
Itchiness
, especially after a warm bath
Red skin coloring, especially of the face
Shortness of breath
Symptoms of blood clots in veins near the skin surface (
phlebitis
)
Vision problems
Ringing in the ears (
tinnitus
)
Joint pain
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. You may also have the following tests:
Bone marrow biopsy
Complete blood count
with
differential
Comprehensive metabolic panel
Erythropoietin level
Genetic test for the
JAK2
V617F variant
Oxygen saturation of the blood
Vitamin B12 level
PV may also affect the results of the following tests:
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR)
Lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH)
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase
Platelet aggregation test
Serum uric acid
PV must be distinguished from other causes of increased red blood cells.
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to reduce the thickness of the blood and prevent bleeding and clotting problems.
A method called phlebotomy is used to decrease blood thickness. One unit of blood (about 1 pint, or 1/2 liter) is removed each week until the number of red blood cells drops. The treatment is continued as needed.
Medicines that may be used include:
Hydroxyurea to reduce the number of red blood cells made by the bone marrow. This medicine may be used when the numbers of other blood cell types are also high.
Interferons to lower blood counts, especially in pregnancy.
Ruxolitinib (Jakafi) to reduce the number of red blood cells and reduce an enlarged spleen. This medicine is prescribed when hydroxyurea and other treatments have failed.
Taking aspirin to reduce the risk of blood clots may be an option for some people, but aspirin increases the risk for stomach bleeding.
Ultraviolet-B or ultraviolet-A light therapy can reduce the severe itching some people experience.
Support Groups
More information and support for people with polycythemia vera and their families can be found at:
The Leukemia and Lymphoma Society --
www.lls.org/myeloproliferative-neoplasms/polycythemia-vera
MPN Research Foundation --
www.mpnresearchfoundation.org/living-with-an-mpn/
National Organization for Rare Disorders --
rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/polycythemia-vera/
NIH Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center --
rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/7422/polycythemia-vera
Outlook (Prognosis)
PV usually develops slowly. Most people do not have symptoms related to the disease at the time of diagnosis. The condition is often diagnosed before severe symptoms occur.
Possible Complications
Complications of PV may include:
Acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML)
Bleeding from the stomach or other parts of the intestinal tract
Gout
(painful swelling of a joint)
Heart failure
Myelofibrosis
(disorder of the bone marrow in which the marrow is replaced by fibrous scar tissue)
Thrombosis (blood clotting, which can cause a
stroke
,
heart attack
, or other body damage)
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if symptoms of PV  develop.
Alternative Names
Primary polycythemia; Polycythemia rubra vera; P. Vera; Myeloproliferative disorder; Erythremia; Splenomegalic polycythemia; Vaquez's disease; Osler's disease; Polycythemia with chronic cyanosis; Erythrocytosis megalosplenica; Cryptogenic polycythemia
References
Gotlib J. Polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and primary myelofibrosis. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 152.
Kremyanskaya M, Najfeld V, Mascarenhas J, Hoffman R. The polycythemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 70.
National Cancer Institute website. Myeloproliferative neoplasms treatment (PDQ) -- health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/myeloproliferative/hp/myeloproliferative-neoplasms-treatment
. Updated September 27, 2024. Accessed February 11, 2025.
Review Date 2/3/2025
Updated by: Warren Brenner, MD, Oncologist, Lynn Cancer Institute, Boca Raton, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bone Marrow Diseases