Toxicology screen: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Toxicology screen
Toxicology screen
A toxicology screen refers to various tests that determine the type and approximate amount of legal and illegal drugs a person has taken by measuring how much is in their blood, urine, or other bodily fluid.
How the Test is Performed
Toxicology screening is most often done using a blood or urine sample. However, it may be done soon after the person swallowed the medicine, using stomach contents taken through
gastric lavage
(stomach pumping) or after vomiting.
How to Prepare for the Test
No special preparation is needed. If you are able, tell your health care provider what drugs (including prescription and over-the-counter medicines) you have taken, including when you took them and how much you consumed.
This test is sometimes part of an investigation for drug use or abuse. Special consents, handling and labeling of specimens, or other procedures may be required.
How the Test will Feel
Blood test:
When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain, while others feel only a prick or stinging sensation. Afterward, there may be some throbbing.
Urine test:
A urine test involves normal urination. There is no discomfort.
Why the Test is Performed
This test is often done in emergency medical situations. It can be used to evaluate possible accidental or intentional overdose or poisoning. It may help determine the cause of
acute
drug toxicity, monitor drug dependency, and determine the presence of substances in the body for medical or legal purposes.
Additional reasons the test may be performed include:
Alcohol use disorder
Alcohol withdrawal state
Altered mental state
Analgesic nephropathy
(kidney poisoning)
Complicated alcohol abstinence syndrome (delirium tremens)
Delirium
Dementia
Drug abuse monitoring
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Intentional overdose
Seizures
Stroke
caused by cocaine use
Suspected
sexual assault
Unconsciousness
If the test is used as a drug screen, it must be done within a certain amount of time after the drug was taken, or while forms of the drug can still be detected in the body. Examples are below:
Alcohol: 3 to 10 hours
Amphetamines: 24 to 48 hours
Barbiturates: up to 6 weeks
Benzodiazepines: up to 6 weeks with high level use
Cocaine: 2 to 4 days; up to 10 to 22 days with heavy use
Codeine: 1 to 2 days
Heroin: 1 to 2 days
Hydromorphone: 1 to 2 days
Methadone: 2 to 3 days
Morphine: 1 to 2 days
Phencyclidine (PCP): 1 to 8 days
Propoxyphene: 6 to 48 hours
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC): up to 6 to 11 weeks with heavy use
Normal Results
Normal value ranges for over-the-counter or prescription medicines may vary slightly among different laboratories. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.
A negative value most often means that alcohol, prescription medicines that have not been prescribed, and illegal drugs have not been detected.
A blood toxicology screen can determine the presence and level (amount) of a drug in your body.
Urine sample results are often reported as positive (substance is found) or negative (no substance is found).
What Abnormal Results Mean
Elevated levels of alcohol or prescription medicines can be a sign of intentional or accidental intoxication or overdose.
The presence of illegal drugs or drugs not prescribed for the person indicates
illicit drug use
.
Some legal prescription and over-the-counter medicines may interact with the testing chemicals and false results in urine tests. Your provider will be aware of this possibility.
Risks
Risks associated with having blood drawn are slight but may include:
Excessive bleeding
Fainting or feeling lightheaded
Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin)
Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken)
Considerations
Substances that may be detected on a toxicology screen include:
Alcohol (ethanol) -- "drinking" alcohol
Amphetamines
Antidepressants
Barbiturates and
hypnotics
Benzodiazepines
Cocaine
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol)
Gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB)
Marijuana
Narcotics
Non-narcotic pain medicines, including acetaminophen and anti-inflammatory drugs
Phencyclidine (PCP)
Phenothiazines (antipsychotic or tranquilizing medicines)
Prescription medicines, any type
Alternative Names
Barbiturates - screen; Benzodiazepines - screen; Amphetamines - screen; Analgesics - screen; Antidepressants - screen; Narcotics - screen; Phenothiazines - screen; Drug abuse screen; Blood alcohol test
Images
Blood test
References
Bluth MH, Pincus MR, Abraham NZ. Toxicology and therapeutic drug monitoring. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds.
Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods
. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 24.
Breuner CC. Substance use disorder. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 157.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Minns AB, Clark RF. Substance abuse. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 187.
Nelson LS, Calello DP. Acute poisoning. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 96.
Review Date 1/8/2025
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Drug Use and Addiction
Drugs and Young People
Poisoning