Chlordiazepoxide overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Chlordiazepoxide overdose
Chlordiazepoxide overdose
Chlordiazepoxide is a prescription medicine used to treat certain anxiety disorders and symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. Chlordiazepoxide overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine.  This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Chlordiazepoxide can be poisonous in high amounts.
Where Found
Chlordiazepoxide is found in medicines with these names:
Librax
Librium
Other medicines may also contain chlordiazepoxide.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of a chlordiazepoxide overdose in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Difficulty breathing
Shallow breathing
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Difficulty urinating
EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT
Double vision
or blurred vision
Rapid side-to-side movement of the eyes (nystagmus)
HEART AND BLOOD
Irregular heartbeat
Low blood pressure
Rapid heartbeat
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Drowsiness
,
stupor
, even coma
Confusion
Depression
Dizziness
Feeling lightheaded, fainting
Loss of balance or coordination
Low body temperature
Memory loss
Seizures
, tremors
Weakness,
uncoordinated movements
SKIN
Bluish-colored lips and fingernails
Rash
Yellow skin
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Abdominal pain
Nausea
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the medicine, and strength, if known
When it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your
local poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
Your provider will measure and monitor your vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
Tests may include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan (advanced imaging) of the brain for neurologic symptoms
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment that may be done may include:
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Laxative
Medicines to reverse the effects of the drug and treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
With proper care, full recovery is likely. But people with
aplastic anemia
(suppression of red blood cell production by the bone marrow), those who develop breathing problems or seizures and subsequent complications, or those who overdose on multiple different substances may not recover fully.
Alternative Names
Librium overdose
References
Aronson JK. Benzodiazepines. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:863-877.
Overbeek DL, Erickson TB. Sedative-hypnotics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 154.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.