Paraffin poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Paraffin poisoning
Paraffin poisoning
Paraffin is a solid waxy substance used to make candles and other items. This article discusses what may occur if you swallow or eat paraffin.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Paraffin is the poisonous ingredient.
Where Found
Paraffin can be found in some:
Arthritis bath/spa treatments
Candles
Waxes
Note: This list may not be all-inclusive.
Symptoms
Eating a lot of paraffin can lead to
intestinal obstruction,
which can cause abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and possible constipation.
If the paraffin contains a dye, a person who has an allergy to that dye may develop tongue and throat swelling, wheezing, and trouble breathing.
Home Care
DO NOT make the person throw up. Contact poison control for help.
If the person has an allergic reaction, call 911 or the local emergency number.
Before Calling Emergency
Determine the following information:
The person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product (as well as the ingredients and strength, if known)
The time it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
Poison Control
The local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
You can also get online poison help now at
Poisonhelp.org
. Just enter the product, poison, or medicine to get expert help.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
If you go to the emergency room, take the container for the poison with you, if possible.
The health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive:
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Medicines to treat symptoms
Mild laxatives to help move the paraffin through the intestine and be removed from the body
If an allergic reaction occurs, the person may need:
Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration. A breathing machine (ventilator) would then be needed.
Chest x-ray
.
ECG
(electrocardiogram, or heart tracing).
Outlook (Prognosis)
Paraffin is usually nontoxic (not harmful) if swallowed in small amounts. Recovery is likely. The person will likely be asked to drink large amounts of fluids to help move the paraffin through the bowel. The exact amount will depend on the person's age and size as well as other medical conditions which may be present. This step will help reduce the risk of complications.
Alternative Names
Wax poisoning - paraffin
References
Crinion S. Toxicology. In: Anderson CC, Kapoor S, Mark TE, eds.
Harriet Lane Handbook, The
. 23rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 3.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Theobald JL, Corcoran JN. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, et al, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics
. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 94.
Wang GS, Buchanan JA. Hydrocarbons. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 147.
Review Date 10/7/2024
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.