Folate-deficiency anemia: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Folate-deficiency anemia
Folate-deficiency anemia
Folate-deficiency anemia is a decrease in red blood cells (
anemia
) due to a lack of folate. Folate is a type of B vitamin. It is also called folic acid.
Anemia is a condition in which the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells. Red blood cells provide oxygen to body tissues.
Causes
Folate (folic acid) is needed for red blood cells to form and grow. You can get folate by eating green leafy vegetables and liver. However, your body does not store folate in large amounts. So, you need to eat plenty of folate-rich foods to maintain normal levels of this vitamin.
In
folate-deficiency
anemia, the red blood cells are abnormally large. Such cells are called macrocytes. They are also called megaloblasts, when they are seen in the bone marrow. That is why this anemia is also called a type of megaloblastic anemia.
Causes of this type of anemia include:
Too little folic acid in your diet
Hemolytic anemia
Long-term
alcoholism
Use of certain medicines (such as phenytoin [Dilantin], methotrexate, sulfasalazine, triamterene, pyrimethamine, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and barbiturates)
The following raise your risk for this type of anemia:
Alcoholism
Eating overcooked food
Poor diet (often seen in the poor, the older people, and people who do not eat fresh fruits or vegetables)
Pregnancy
Weight loss diets
Folic acid is needed to help a baby in the womb grow properly. Too little
folic acid during pregnancy
may lead to birth defects in a baby.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Fatigue
Weakness
Headache
Pallor
Sore mouth and tongue
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests that may be done include:
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Red blood cell folate level
In rare cases, a
bone marrow aspiration
may be done.
Treatment
The goal is to identify and treat the cause of the folate deficiency.
You may receive folic acid supplements by mouth, injected into muscle, or through a vein (in rare cases). If you have low folate levels because of a problem with your intestines, you may need treatment for the rest of your life.
Diet changes can help boost your folate level. Eat more green, leafy vegetables and citrus fruits.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Folate-deficiency anemia most often responds well to treatment within 3 to 6 months. It will likely get better when the underlying cause of the deficiency is treated.
Possible Complications
Symptoms of anemia can cause discomfort. In pregnant women, folate deficiency has been associated with neural tube or spinal defects (such as
spina bifida
) in the infant.
Other more severe complications may include:
Curly graying hair
Increased skin color (pigment)
Infertility
Worsening of heart disease or
heart failure
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have symptoms of folate deficiency anemia.
Prevention
Eating plenty of folate-rich foods can help prevent this condition.
Experts recommend that women take 400 to 800 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid every day before they get pregnant and through the first 3 months of their pregnancy.
Images
Megaloblastic anemia - view of red blood cells
Blood cells
References
Antony AC. Megaloblastic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 40.
Kumar V, Abbas AK, Aster JC. Hematopoietic and lymphoid systems. In: Kumar V, Abbas AK, Aster JC, Deyrup AT, Das A, eds.
Robbins and Kumar Basic Pathology
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 10.
Stabler SP. Megaloblastic anemias. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 150.
Review Date 3/31/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Anemia
Folic Acid