Metal cleaner poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Metal cleaner poisoning
Metal cleaner poisoning
Metal cleaners are very strong chemical products that contain acids and other chemicals. This article discusses poisoning from swallowing or breathing in such products.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Metal cleaners contain organic compounds called hydrocarbons and other chemicals, including:
1,2-butylene oxide
Boric acid
Cocoyl sarcosine
Dicarboxylic fatty acid
Dimethoxymethane
Dodecanedioic acid
N-propyl bromide
Sodium hydroxide
T-butanol
Where Found
Various metal cleaners contain these compounds.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of metal cleaner poisoning in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
Breathing difficulty (from breathing in the chemical)
Throat swelling (may also cause breathing difficulty)
EYES, EARS, NOSE, AND THROAT
Severe pain in the throat
Severe pain or burning in the nose, eyes, ears, lips, or tongue
Vision loss
HEART AND BLOOD
Collapse
Low blood pressure (
shock
)
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Abdominal pain -- severe
Blood in the stool
Burns of the food pipe (esophagus)
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
(possibly with blood)
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Depression
Dizziness
Drowsiness
Feeling of being drunk (euphoria)
Headache
Loss of alertness (unconsciousness)
Seizures
Staggering
Weakness
SKIN
Burns
Irritation
Necrosis (holes) in the skin or underlying tissues
Home Care
Get medical help right away. Do not make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider.
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
If the person swallowed the metal cleaner, give them water or milk right away, unless poison control or a provider tells you not to. Do not give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness.
If the person breathed in the poison, move them to fresh air right away.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Exect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Bronchoscopy -- camera placed down the throat to see burns in the airways and lungs
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Endoscopy
-- camera down the throat to look for burns in the esophagus and the stomach
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (IV).
Washing of the skin (irrigation). Perhaps every few hours for several days.
Tube through the mouth into the stomach to wash out the stomach (
gastric lavage
).
Surgery to remove burned skin.
Breathing support, including a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (
ventilator
).
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. Swallowing this type of poison can have severe effects on many parts of the body. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery.
Burns in the airway or gastrointestinal tract can lead to tissue necrosis, resulting in infection, shock, and death, even several months after the substance was first swallowed. Scars may form in these tissues leading to long-term difficulties with breathing, swallowing, and digestion.
If metal cleaner gets into the lungs (
aspiration
), serious and possibly permanent lung damage can occur.
References
Aronson JK. Organic solvents. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:385-389.
Wang GS, Buchanan JA. Hydrocarbons. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 147.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.