Mitral valve surgery - minimally invasive: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Mitral valve surgery - minimally invasive
Mitral valve surgery - minimally invasive
Mitral valve surgery is surgery to either repair or replace the mitral valve in your heart.
Blood flows from the lungs and enters a pumping chamber of the heart called the left atrium. The blood then flows into the final pumping chamber of the heart called the left ventricle. The mitral valve is located between these two chambers. It makes sure that the blood keeps moving forward through the heart.
You may need surgery on your mitral valve if:
The mitral valve is hardened (calcified). This prevents blood from moving forward through the valve.
The mitral valve is too loose. Blood tends to flow backward when this occurs.
Minimally invasive mitral valve surgery is done through several small cuts. Another type of operation,
open mitral valve surgery
, requires a larger cut.
Description
Before your surgery, you will receive
general anesthesia
.
You will be asleep and pain-free.
There are several different ways to perform minimally invasive mitral valve surgery.
Your heart surgeon may make a 2- to 3-inch-long (5 to 7.5 centimeters) cut in the right part of your chest near the sternum (breastbone). Muscles in the area will be divided. This lets the surgeon reach the heart. A small cut is made in the left side of your heart so the surgeon can repair or replace the mitral valve.
In endoscopic surgery, your surgeon makes 1 to 4 small holes in your chest. Surgery is done through the cuts using a camera and special surgical tools. For
robotically-assisted
valve surgery, the surgeon makes 2 to 4 tiny cuts in your chest. The cuts are about 1/2 to 3/4 in (1.5 to 2 cm) each. The surgeon uses a special computer to control robotic arms during the surgery. A 3D view of the heart and mitral valve are displayed on a computer in the operating room.
You will need a heart-lung machine for these types of surgery. You will be connected to this device through small cuts in the groin or on the chest.
If your surgeon can repair your mitral valve, you may have a:
Ring annuloplasty -- The surgeon tightens the valve by sewing a ring of metal, cloth, or tissue around the valve.
Valve repair -- The surgeon trims, shapes, or rebuilds one or both of the flaps that open and close the valve.
You will need a new valve if there is too much damage to your mitral valve. This is called mitral valve replacement surgery. Your surgeon may remove some or all of your mitral valve and sew a new one into place. There are two main types of new valves:
Mechanical -- Made of man-made materials, such as titanium and carbon. These valves last the longest. You will need to take blood-thinning medicine, such as warfarin (Coumadin), for the rest of your life.
Biological -- Made of human or animal tissue. These valves last 10 to 15 years or longer, but you will probably not need to take blood thinners for life.
The surgery may take 2 to 4 hours.
This surgery can sometimes be done through a groin artery, with no cuts on your chest. The surgeon sends a catheter (flexible tube) with a balloon attached on the end. The balloon inflates to stretch the opening of the valve. This procedure is called percutaneous valvuloplasty and done for a blocked mitral valve.
A new procedure involves placing a catheter through an artery in the groin and clipping the valve to prevent the valve from leaking.
Why the Procedure is Performed
You may need surgery if your mitral valve does not work properly because:
You have
mitral regurgitation
-- When a mitral valve does not close all the way and allows blood to leak back into the left atria.
You have
mitral stenosis
-- When a mitral valve does not open fully and restricts blood flow.
Your valve has developed an infection (infectious
endocarditis
).
You have severe
mitral valve prolapse
that is not controlled with medicine.
Minimally invasive surgery may be done for these reasons:
Changes in your mitral valve are causing major heart symptoms, such as shortness of breath, leg swelling, or heart failure.
Tests show that the changes in your mitral valve are beginning to harm your heart function.
Damage to your heart valve from infection (endocarditis).
A minimally invasive procedure has many benefits. There is less pain, blood loss, and risk of infection. You will also recover faster than you would from open heart surgery. However, some people may not be able to have this type of procedure.
Percutaneous valvuloplasty is only done in people who are too sick to have anesthesia. The results of this procedure are not long-lasting.
Risks
Risks for any surgery are:
Blood clots
in the legs that may travel to the lungs
Blood loss
Breathing problems
Infection, including in the lungs, kidneys, bladder, chest, or heart valves
Reactions to medicines
Minimally invasive surgery techniques have far fewer risks than open surgery. Possible risks from minimally invasive valve surgery are:
Damage to other organs, nerves, or bones
Heart attack
,
stroke
, or death
Infection of the new valve
Irregular heartbeat
that must be treated with medicines or a
pacemaker
Kidney failure
Poor healing of the wounds
Before the Procedure
Tell your surgeon or nurse if:
You are or could be pregnant
You are taking any medicines, including medicines, supplements, or herbs you bought without a prescription
You may be able to store blood in the blood bank for transfusions during and after your surgery. Ask your surgeon about how you and your family members can donate blood.
If you smoke, you should stop. Ask your health care
provider for help
.
During the week before your surgery:
You may be asked to temporarily stop taking medicines that keep your blood from clotting. These medicines are called blood thinners. This includes over-the-counter medicines and supplements such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and vitamin E. Many prescription medicines are also blood thinners.
Ask your surgeon which medicines you should still take on the day of surgery.
Get your house ready
before you go to the hospital so things will be easier when you return.
The day before your surgery, take a shower and wash your hair. You may need to wash your whole body below your neck with a special soap. Scrub your chest 2 or 3 times with this soap. You also may need to take an antibiotic to guard against infection.
On the day of surgery:
Follow instructions about when to stop eating and drinking.
Take the medicines your surgeon told you to take with a small sip of water.
Arrive at the hospital on time.
After the Procedure
Expect to spend 3 to 5 days in the hospital after surgery. You will wake up in the intensive care unit (ICU) and recover there for 1 or 2 days. Nurses will closely watch monitors that display your vital signs (pulse, temperature, and breathing).
Two to three tubes will be in your chest to drain fluid from around your heart. They are usually removed 1 to 3 days after surgery. You may have a
catheter
(flexible tube) in your bladder to drain urine. You may also have intravenous (IV) lines to get fluids.
You will go from the ICU to a regular hospital room. Your heart and vital signs will be monitored until you are ready to go home. You will receive pain medicine for pain in your chest.
Your nurse will help start activity slowly. You may begin a program to make your heart and body stronger.
A pacemaker may be placed in your heart if your heart rate becomes too slow after surgery. This may be temporary or you may need a permanent pacemaker before you leave the hospital.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Mechanical heart valves do not fail often. However, blood clots can develop on them. If a blood clot forms, you may have a stroke. Bleeding can occur, but this is rare.
Biological valves have a lower risk of blood clots, but tend to fail over a long period of time.
The results of mitral valve repair are excellent. For best results, choose to have surgery at a center that does many of these procedures. Minimally invasive heart valve surgery has improved greatly in recent years. These techniques are safe for most people, and can reduce recovery time and pain.
Alternative Names
Mitral valve repair - right mini-thoracotomy; Mitral valve repair - partial upper or lower sternotomy; Robotically-assisted endoscopic valve repair; Percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty
Patient Instructions
Antiplatelet medicines - P2Y12 inhibitors
Aspirin and heart disease
Heart valve surgery - discharge
Taking warfarin
Images
Heart valves - anterior view
Heart valves - superior view
Mitral stenosis
Mitral valve prolapse
Heart valve surgery - series
References
Bajwa G, Mihaljevic T. Minimally invasive mitral valve surgery: partial sternotomy approach. In: Sellke FW, Ruel M, eds.
Atlas of Cardiac Surgical Techniques
. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 20.
Elde S, Woo AJ. Surgical treatment of mitral valve disease. In: Sellke FW, del Nido PJ, Swanson SJ, eds.
Sabiston and Spencer Surgery of the Chest
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 83.
Hahn RT, Bonow RO. Mitral regurgitation. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine.
12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 76.
Herrmann HC, Reardon MJ. Transcatheter therapies for mitral and tricuspid valvular heart disease. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds.
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine
. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 78.
Rosengart TR, Aberle CM, Ryan C. Acquired heart disease: valvular. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery
. 21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 61.
Review Date 1/27/2025
Updated by: Mary C. Mancini, MD, PhD, Cardiothoracic Surgeon, Shreveport, LA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Heart Surgery
Heart Valve Diseases
Mitral Valve Prolapse