ABO incompatibility: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
ABO incompatibility
ABO incompatibility
A, B, AB, and O are the 4 major blood types. The types are based on small substances (molecules) on the surface of the blood cells.
When people who have  one blood type receive blood from someone with a different blood type, it may cause their immune system to react. This is called ABO incompatibility.
Due to modern testing techniques, this problem is very rare.
Causes
The different blood types are:
Type A
Type B
Type AB
Type O
People who have one blood type may form proteins (
antibodies
) that cause their immune system to react against one or more of the other blood types.
Being exposed to another type of blood can cause a reaction. This is important when someone needs to receive a blood transfusion or have an organ transplant. The blood types must be compatible to avoid an ABO incompatibility reaction.
For example:
People with type A blood will react against type B or type AB blood.
People with type B blood will react against type A or type AB blood.
People with type O blood will react against type A, type B, or type AB blood.
People with type AB blood will not react against type A, type B, type AB, or type O blood.
Type O blood does not cause an immune response when it is given to people with type A, type B, or type AB blood. This is why type O blood cells can be given to people of any blood type. People with type O blood are called universal donors. But people with type O can only receive type O blood.
Both blood and plasma transfusions must be matched to avoid an immune reaction. Before anyone receives blood, both the blood and the person receiving it are tested carefully to avoid a reaction. Usually, a reaction occurs because of a clerical error causing someone to receive incompatible blood.
Symptoms
The following are symptoms of ABO incompatible
transfusion reactions
:
Low back pain
Blood in urine
Chills
Feeling of impending doom
Fever
Nausea and vomiting
Shortness of breath
Increased heart rate
Pain at infusion site
Chest pain
Dizziness
Bronchospasm (spasm of the muscles lining the lung; causes cough)
Yellow skin and whites of the eyes (
jaundice
)
Acute kidney failure
Low blood pressure
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. Blood tests will usually show:
The
bilirubin level
is high
The
complete blood count
(CBC) shows damage to red blood cells or
anemia
The recipient's and donor's blood are not compatible
Elevated
lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH)
Elevated
blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
and
blood creatinine
; in case of renal injury
Prolonged
prothrombin time
or
partial thromboplastin time
(findings of DIC)
Positive
direct antiglobulin test
(DAT)
Urine tests show the presence of hemoglobin due to breakdown of red blood cells.
Treatment
In case of any reaction, the transfusion should be stopped immediately. Treatment may also include:
Medicines used to treat allergic reactions (antihistamines)
Medicines used to treat swelling and allergies (steroids)
Fluids given through a vein (
intravenously
)
Medicines to raise blood pressure if it drops too low
Outlook (Prognosis)
ABO incompatibility can be a very serious problem that can result in death. With the right and timely treatment, a full recovery is expected.
Possible Complications
Complications that may result include:
Kidney failure
Low blood pressure needing intensive care
Death
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have recently had a blood transfusion or transplant and you have symptoms of ABO incompatibility.
Prevention
Careful testing of donor and  recipient blood types before transfusion or transplant can prevent this problem.
Alternative Names
Transfusion reaction - hemolytic; Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction; AHTR; Blood incompatibility - ABO
Images
Jaundiced infant
Antibodies
References
Manis JP. Blood components, product modifications, and blood donor screening. In: Rifai N, Chiu RWK, Young I, Burnham CAD, Wittwer CT, eds.
Tietz Textbook of Laboratory Medicine
. 7th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2023:chap 91.
San Miguel CE, Kaide CG. Blood and blood components. In: Walls RM, ed. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 108.
Schipperus MR, Wiersum-Osselton JC. Transfusion reactions to blood and hematopoietic stem cell therapy products. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 117.
Review Date 6/17/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Blood Transfusion and Donation