VIPoma: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
VIPoma
VIPoma
VIPoma is a very rare
cancer
that usually grows from cells in the pancreas called islet cells.
Causes
VIPoma causes cells in the pancreas to produce a high level of a hormone called vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). This hormone increases secretions from the intestines. It also relaxes some of the smooth muscles in the gastrointestinal system.
The exact cause of VIPomas is not known.
VIPomas are often diagnosed in adults, most commonly around age 50. Women are more likely to be affected than men. This cancer is rare. Each year, only about 1 in 1 million people are diagnosed with a VIPoma.
Symptoms
Symptoms of VIPoma may include any of the following:
Abdominal pain
and cramping
Diarrhea (watery, and often in large amounts)
Dehydration
Flushing or redness of the face
Muscle cramps due to low blood potassium (
hypokalemia
)
Nausea
Weight loss
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your medical history and symptoms.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood chemistry tests (basic or
comprehensive metabolic panel
)
CT scan of the abdomen
Genetic tests
MRI of the abdomen
Stool exam for cause of diarrhea and
electrolyte
levels
VIP level in the blood
Treatment
The first goal of treatment is to correct dehydration. Fluids are often given through a vein (
intravenous
fluids) to replace fluids lost through diarrhea.
The next goal is to slow the diarrhea. Medicines can help regulate diarrhea. One such medicine is octreotide. It is a manmade form of a natural hormone that blocks the action of VIP.
The best chance of a cure is surgery to remove the tumor. If the tumor has not spread to other organs, surgery can often cure the condition.
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a
cancer support group
. Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Surgery can usually cure VIPomas. But, in one third to one half of people, the tumor has spread by the time of diagnosis and cannot be cured. However, it grows fairly slowly, and its effects often can be regulated by octreotide.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Cancer spread (metastases)
Cardiac arrest from low blood potassium level
Dehydration
When to Contact a Medical Professional
If you have watery diarrhea for more than 2 to 3 days, contact your provider.
Alternative Names
Vasoactive intestinal peptide-producing tumor; VIPoma syndrome; Pancreatic endocrine tumor; Verner-Morrison syndrome; WDHA
Images
Pancreas
References
Asban A, Patel AJ, Reddy S, Wang T, Balentine CJ, Chen H. Cancer of the endocrine system. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff's Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 68.
De Herder WW, Feelders RA, Hofland J. Neuroendocrine tumors and disorders. In: Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, Rosen CJ, Kopp PA, eds.
Williams Textbook of Endocrinology
. 15th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 43.
National Cancer Institute website. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (islet cell tumors) treatment (PDQ) - health professional version.
www.cancer.gov/types/pancreatic/hp/pnet-treatment-pdq
. Updated August 16, 2024. Accessed October 15, 2024.
Review Date 10/1/2024
Updated by: Sandeep K. Dhaliwal, MD, board-certified in Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Springfield, VA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Pancreatic Cancer