Mediastinitis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Mediastinitis
Mediastinitis
Mediastinitis is swelling and irritation (inflammation) of the chest area between the lungs (mediastinum). This area contains the heart, large blood vessels, windpipe (trachea), food tube (esophagus), thymus gland, lymph nodes, and connective tissue.
Causes
Mediastinitis usually results from an infection. It may occur suddenly (
acute
), or it may develop slowly and get worse over time (
chronic
). It most often occurs in people who recently had an upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy or chest surgery.
A person may have a tear in their esophagus that causes mediastinitis. Causes of the tear include:
A procedure such as upper GI
endoscopy
Forceful or constant
vomiting
Trauma
Other causes of mediastinitis include:
A fungal infection called
histoplasmosis
Radiation
to the chest
Inflammation of the lymph nodes, lungs, liver, eyes, skin, or other tissues (
sarcoidosis
)
Tuberculosis
Breathing in anthrax
Cancer
Risk factors include:
Disease of the esophagus
Diabetes mellitus
Problems in the upper gastrointestinal tract
Recent chest surgery or upper GI endoscopy
Weakened immune system
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:
Chest pain
Chills
Fever
General discomfort
Shortness of breath
Signs of mediastinitis in people who have had recent surgery include:
Chest wall tenderness
Wound drainage
Unstable chest wall
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and medical history.
Tests may include:
Chest CT scan
or
MRI scan
Chest x-ray
Ultrasound
Your provider may insert a needle into the area of inflammation. This is to obtain a sample to send for a
Gram stain
, other stains and
culture
to determine the type of infection, if present.
Treatment
You may receive antibiotics if you have an infection.
You may need surgery to remove the area of inflammation if the blood vessels, windpipe, or esophagus is blocked.
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well a person does depends on the cause and severity of the mediastinitis.
Mediastinitis after chest surgery is very serious. There is a risk of dying from this condition.
Possible Complications
Complications include the following:
Spread of the infection to the bloodstream, blood vessels, bones, heart, or lungs
Scarring
Scarring can be severe, especially when it is caused by chronic mediastinitis. Scarring can interfere with heart or lung function.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have had open chest surgery and develop:
Chest pain
Chills
Drainage from the wound
Fever
Shortness of breath
If you have a lung infection or sarcoidosis and develop any of these symptoms, contact your provider right away.
Prevention
To lessen the risk of developing mediastinitis related to chest surgery, surgical wounds should be
kept clean and dry
after surgery.
Treating tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, or other conditions associated with mediastinitis may prevent this complication.
Alternative Names
Chest infection
Images
Respiratory system
Mediastinoscopy
References
Lentz RJ, Loyd JE. Mediastinitis and fibrosing mediastinitis. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 116.
Van Schooneveld TC, Rupp ME. Mediastinitis. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 85.
Review Date 8/29/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Chest Injuries and Disorders