Sleeping sickness: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Sleeping sickness
Sleeping sickness
Sleeping sickness is an infection caused by tiny parasites carried by certain flies. It results in swelling of the brain.
Causes
Sleeping sickness is caused by two types of parasites
Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense
and
Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
.
T. b. rhodesiense
causes the more severe form of the illness.
Tsetse flies carry the infection. When an infected fly bites you, the infection spreads through your bloodstream.
Risk factors include living in parts of Africa where the disease is found and being bitten by tsetse flies. The disease does not occur in the United States, but travelers who have visited or lived in Africa can get infected.
Symptoms
General symptoms include:
Mood changes, anxiety
Fever, sweating
Headache
Weakness
Insomnia
at night
Sleepiness during the day (may be uncontrollable)
Swollen lymph nodes
all over the body
Swollen, red, painful
nodule
at the site of the fly bite
Exams and Tests
Diagnosis is often based on a physical exam and detailed information about the symptoms. If your health care provider suspects sleeping sickness, you'll be asked about recent travel. Blood tests will be ordered to confirm the diagnosis.
Tests include the following:
Blood smear
to check for parasites
Cerebrospinal fluid tests
(fluid from around your spinal cord)
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Lymph node
aspiration
Treatment
Medicines used to treat this disorder include:
Eflornithine (for
T. b. gambiense
only)
Melarsoprol
Pentamidine (for
T. b. gambiense
only)
Suramin (Antrypol)
Some people may receive a combination of these medicines.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Without treatment, death can occur within 6 months from
cardiac failure
or from
T. b. rhodesiense
infection itself.
T. b. gambiense
infection causes sleeping sickness disease and gets worse quickly, often over a few weeks. The disease needs to be treated immediately.
Possible Complications
Complications include:
Injury related to falling asleep while driving or during other activities
Gradual damage to the nervous system
Uncontrollable sleep as the disease gets worse
Coma
When to Contact a Medical Professional
See your provider right away if you have symptoms, especially if you've traveled to places where the disease is common. It is important to begin treatment as soon as possible.
Prevention
Pentamidine injections protect against
T. b. gambiense
, but not against
T. b. rhodesiense
. Because this medicine is toxic, using it for prevention is not usually recommended.
Insect control measures can help prevent the spread of sleeping sickness in high-risk areas.
Alternative Names
Parasite infection - human African trypanosomiasis
References
Kirchhoff LV. Agents of African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness). In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 277.
Petri WA Jr. African sleeping sickness. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 317.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Parasitic Diseases