Rat-bite fever: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Rat-bite fever
Rat-bite fever
Rat-bite fever is a rare bacterial disease spread by the bite of an infected rodent.
Causes
Rat-bite fever can be caused by either of two different bacteria,
Streptobacillus moniliformis
or
Spirillum minus.
Both of these are found in the mouths of rodents.
The disease is most often seen in:
Asia
Europe
North America
Most people get rat-bite fever through contact with urine or fluids from the mouth, eye, or nose of an infected animal. This most commonly occurs through a bite or scratch. Some cases may occur simply through contact with these fluids.
A rat is usually the source of the infection. Other animals that may cause this infection include:
Gerbils
Squirrels
Weasels
Symptoms
Symptoms depend on the bacteria that caused the infection.
Symptoms due to
Streptobacillus moniliformis
may include:
Chills
Fever
Joint pain, redness, or swelling
Rash
Symptoms due to
Spirillum minus
may include:
Chills
Fever
Open sore at the site of the bite
Rash with red or purple patches and bumps
Swollen lymph nodes
near the bite
Symptoms from either organism usually resolve within 2 weeks. Untreated, symptoms such as fever or joint pain, can keep returning for many weeks or longer.
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. If your provider suspects rat-bite fever, tests will be done to detect the bacteria in:
Skin
Blood
Joint fluid
Lymph nodes
Blood antibody tests
and other techniques may also be used.
Treatment
Rat-bite fever is treated with antibiotics (typically oral) for 7 to 14 days.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook is excellent with early treatment. If it is not treated, the death rate can be 10% to 15%.
Possible Complications
Rat-bite fever may cause these complications:
Abscesses
of the brain or soft tissue
Infection of the heart valves
Inflammation of the parotid (salivary) glands
Inflammation of the tendons
Inflammation of the heart lining
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if:
You or your child has had recent contact with a rat or other rodent
The person who was bitten has symptoms of rat-bite fever
Prevention
Avoiding contact with rats or rat-contaminated dwellings may help prevent rat-bite fever. Taking antibiotics by mouth promptly after a rat-bite may also help prevent this illness.
Alternative Names
Streptobacillary fever; Streptobacillosis; Haverhill fever; Epidemic arthritic erythema; Spirillary fever; Sodoku
References
Mekala V, Washburn RG. Rat-bite fever:
Streptobacillus moniliformis
and
Spirillum minus
. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds.
Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases
. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 231.
Shandro JR, Jauregui JM. Wilderness-acquired zoonoses. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 34.
Vyas JM. Rat-bite fever. In: Kellerman RD, Rakel D, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds.
Conn's Current Therapy 2024
. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:693-695.
Review Date 11/10/2024
Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Roy and Diana Vagelos Professor in Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York, NY. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Animal Diseases and Your Health
Bacterial Infections