Risks of tobacco: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Risks of tobacco
Risks of tobacco
Knowing the serious health risks of using tobacco may help motivate you to quit. Using tobacco over a long time can increase your risk for many health problems.
Information
Tobacco is a plant. Its leaves are smoked, chewed, or sniffed for a variety of effects.
Tobacco contains the chemical nicotine, which is an addictive substance.
Tobacco smoke contains more than 7,000 chemicals, at least 70 of which are known to cause cancer.
Tobacco that is not burned is called smokeless tobacco. Including nicotine, there are at least 30 chemicals in smokeless tobacco that are known to cause cancer.
HEALTH RISKS OF SMOKING OR USING SMOKELESS TOBACCO
There are many health risks from smoking and using tobacco. The more serious ones are listed below.
Heart and blood vessel problems:
Blood clots
and
weakness in the walls of blood vessels
in the brain, which can lead to
stroke
Blood clots in the legs
, which may travel to the lungs
Coronary artery disease
, including
angina
and heart attack
Temporarily
increased blood pressure
after smoking
Poor blood supply to the legs
Problems with erections
because of decreased blood flow into the penis
Other health risks or problems:
Cancer (more likely in the lung, mouth, larynx, nose and sinuses, throat, esophagus, stomach, bladder, kidney, pancreas, cervix, colon, and rectum)
Poor wound healing after surgery
Lung problems, such as
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), or
asthma
that is harder to control
Problems during pregnancy, such as babies born at a low birth weight,
early labor
,
losing your baby
, and
cleft lip
Decreased ability to taste and smell
Harm to sperm, which may lead to
infertility
Loss of sight due to an increased risk of
macular degeneration
Tooth and gum diseases
Wrinkling of the skin
Smokers who switch to smokeless tobacco instead of quitting tobacco still have health risks:
Increased risk for cancer of the mouth, tongue, esophagus, and pancreas
Gum problems, tooth wear, and
cavities
Worsening high blood pressure and angina
HEALTH RISKS OF SECONDHAND SMOKE
Those who are often around the smoke of others (secondhand smoke) have a higher risk for:
Heart attack and heart disease
Lung cancer
Sudden and severe irritant reactions, including of the eye, nose, throat, and lower respiratory tract
Infants and children who are often exposed to secondhand smoke are at risk for:
Asthma flares (children with asthma who live with a smoker are much more likely to visit the emergency room)
Infections of the mouth, throat, sinuses, ears, and lungs
Lung damage (poor lung function)
Sudden infant death syndrome
(SIDS)
Like any addiction, quitting tobacco is difficult, especially if you are doing it alone.
Seek support from family members, friends, and coworkers.
Talk to your health care provider about
nicotine replacement therapy
and
smoking cessation medicines
.
Join a
smoking cessation program
and you will have a much better chance of success. Such programs are offered by hospitals, health departments, community centers, and work sites.
Alternative Names
Secondhand smoke - risks; Cigarette smoking - risks; Smoking and smokeless tobacco - risks; Nicotine - risks
Patient Instructions
Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair - open - discharge
Angioplasty and stent placement - carotid artery - discharge
Angioplasty and stent placement - peripheral arteries - discharge
Aortic aneurysm repair - endovascular - discharge
Carotid artery surgery - discharge
Images
Tobacco and vascular disease
Tobacco and chemicals
Tobacco and cancer
Tobacco health risks
Secondhand smoke and lung cancer
Respiratory cilia
References
Atkinson DL, Minnix J, Cinciripini PM, Karam-Hage M. Nicotine. In: Johnson BA, ed.
Addiction Medicine: Science and Practice
. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 23.
Brunetta PG, Kroon L. Smoking cessation. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 66.
George TP. Nicotine and tobacco. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 363.
Gotts JE, Benowitz NL. Smoking hazards: Cigarettes, vaping, marijuana. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds.
Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 65.
US Preventive Services Task Force; Krist AH, Davidson KW, Mangione CM, et al. Interventions for tobacco smoking cessation in adults, including pregnant persons: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.
JAMA
. 2021;325(3):265-279. PMID: 33464343
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33464343/
.
Review Date 7/23/2024
Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Smoking