Idiopathic intracranial hypertension: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension  (IIH) is a condition in which the pressure inside the skull is increased. The brain is affected in a way that the condition appears to be, but is not, a tumor.
Causes
The condition occurs more often in women than men, especially in young obese women 20 to 40 years old. It is rare in infants, but can occur in children. Before puberty, it occurs equally in boys and girls.
The cause is unknown.
Certain medicines can increase the risk of developing this condition. These medicines include:
Amiodarone
Birth control pills such as levonorgestrel (Norplant)
Cyclosporine
Cytarabine
Growth hormone
Isotretinoin
Levothyroxine (children)
Lithium carbonate
Minocycline
Nalidixic acid
Nitrofurantoin
Phenytoin
Steroids (starting or stopping them)
Sulfa antibiotics
Tamoxifen
Tetracycline
Certain drugs that contain Vitamin A, such as cis-retinoic acid (Accutane)
The following factors are also related to this condition:
Down syndrome
Behcet disease
Chronic kidney failure
Endocrine (hormone) disorders such as
Addison disease
,
Cushing disease
,
hypoparathyroidism
,
polycystic ovary syndrome
Following treatment (embolization) of an
arteriovenous malformation
Infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS, Lyme disease, following chickenpox in children
Iron deficiency anemia
Obesity
Obstructive sleep apnea
Pregnancy
Sarcoidosis (a disease that causes inflammation of the lymph nodes, lungs, liver, eyes, skin, or other tissues)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Turner syndrome
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Headaches, throbbing, daily, irregular and worse in the morning
Neck pain
Blurred vision
Buzzing sound in the ears (tinnitus)
Dizziness
Double vision
(diplopia)
Nausea, vomiting
Vision problems such as flashing lights or even loss of vision
Low back pain, radiating along both legs
Headaches may get worse during physical activity, especially when you tighten the stomach muscles during coughing or straining.
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Signs of this condition include:
Bulging anterior fontanelle
in infants
Increased head size in infants
Swelling of the optic nerve in the back of the eye (papilledema)
Vision problems including loss of peripheral vision
Inward turning of the eye toward the nose (sixth cranial, or abducens, nerve palsy)
Even though there is increased pressure in the skull, there is no change in alertness.
Tests that may be done include:
Funduscopic examination of the eyes
CT scan of the head
Eye exam, including
visual field
testing
MRI of the head
with MR venography
Lumbar puncture
(spinal tap)
The diagnosis is made when other health conditions are ruled out. These include conditions that may cause increased pressure in the skull, such as:
Hydrocephalus
Tumor
Venous sinus thrombosis
Infection
Treatment
Treatment is aimed at the cause of IIH. The main goal of treatments is to preserve vision and reduce the severity of headaches.
lumbar puncture
(spinal tap) can help relieve pressure in the brain and prevent vision problems.  Repeat lumbar punctures are helpful for pregnant women in order to delay surgery until after delivery.
Other treatments may include:
Fluid or salt restriction
Medicines such as corticosteroids, acetazolamide, furosemide, and topiramate
Shunting procedures to relieve pressure from spinal fluid buildup
Surgery to relieve pressure on the optic nerve
Weight loss
Treatment of the underlying disease, such as vitamin A overdose
People will need to have their vision closely monitored. There can be vision loss, which is sometimes permanent. Follow-up MRI or CT scans may be done to rule out problems such as tumors or hydrocephalus (buildup of fluid inside the skull).
In some cases, the pressure inside the brain remains high for many years. Symptoms can return in some people. A small number of people have symptoms that slowly get worse and lead to blindness.
Outlook (Prognosis)
The condition sometimes disappears on its own within 6 months. Symptoms can return in some people. A small number of people have symptoms that slowly get worse and lead to blindness.
Possible Complications
Vision loss is a serious complication of this condition.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you or your child has any of the symptoms listed above.
Alternative Names
Pseudotumor cerebri syndrome; Benign intracranial hypertension
Images
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
References
Alrobaian
M, Miller NR. Pseudotumor cerebri. In: Winn HR, ed.
Youmans and Winn
Neurological Surgery.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 189.
Rosenberg
GA. Brain edema and disorders of cerebrospinal fluid circulation. In: Jankovic
J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley and Daroff's Neurology
in Clinical Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 88.
Safier RA,
Cleves-Bayon C, Gaesser J. Neurology. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, Garrison
J, eds.
Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis.
8th
ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2023:chap 16.
Review Date 12/31/2023
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Brain Diseases