Painful swallowing: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Painful swallowing
Painful swallowing
Painful swallowing is any pain or discomfort while swallowing. You may feel it high in the neck or lower down behind the breastbone. Most often, the pain feels like a strong sensation of squeezing or burning. Painful swallowing may be a symptom of a serious disorder.
Considerations
Swallowing involves many nerves and muscles in the mouth, throat area, and food pipe (esophagus). Part of swallowing is voluntary. This means you are aware of controlling the action. However, much of swallowing is involuntary once it starts.
Watch this video about:
Swallowing
Problems at any point in the swallowing process (including chewing, moving food to the back of the mouth, or moving it to the stomach) can result in painful swallowing.
Swallowing problems can cause symptoms such as:
Chest pain
Feeling of food stuck in the throat
Heaviness or pressure in the neck or upper chest while eating
Causes
Swallowing problems may be due to infections, such as:
Cytomegalovirus
Gum disease (
gingivitis
)
Herpes simplex virus
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Pharyngitis
(sore throat)
Thrush
(yeast infection of the mouth)
Yeast infection of the esophagus
Swallowing problems may be due to a problem with the esophagus, such as:
Achalasia
Esophageal spasms
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD)
Inflammation of the esophagus
Nutcracker esophagus
Ulcer in the esophagus, especially due to tetracyclines (antibiotic), aspirin, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen or naproxen
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Other causes of swallowing problems include:
Mouth or throat ulcers
Something stuck in the throat (for example, fish or chicken bones)
Tooth infection or abscess
Home Care
Some tips that may help you to ease swallowing pain at home include:
Eat slowly and chew your food well.
Eat pureed foods or liquids if solid foods are hard to swallow.
Avoid very cold or very hot foods if they make your symptoms worse.
If someone is choking, immediately perform the
Heimlich maneuver
.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your health care provider if you have painful swallowing and:
Blood in your stools or your stools appear black or tarry
Shortness of breath or lightheadedness
Weight loss
Tell your provider about any other symptoms that occur with the painful swallowing, including:
Abdominal pain
Chills
Cough
Fever
Heartburn
Nausea or vomiting
Sour taste in the mouth
Wheezing
What to Expect at Your Office Visit
Your provider will examine you and ask about your medical history and symptoms, including:
Do you have pain when swallowing solids, liquids, or both?
Is the pain constant or does it come and go?
Is the pain getting worse?
Do you have difficulty swallowing?
Do you have a sore throat?
Does it feel like there is a lump in your throat?
Have you inhaled or swallowed any irritating substances?
What other symptoms do you have?
What other health problems do you have?
What medicines do you take?
The following tests may be done:
Endoscopy
with
biopsy
Barium swallow
and upper GI series
Chest x-ray
Esophageal pH monitoring
(measures acid in the esophagus)
Esophageal manometry
(measures pressure in the esophagus)
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
(EGD)
HIV testing
Neck x-ray
Throat culture
Alternative Names
Swallowing - pain or burning; Odynophagia; Burning feeling when swallowing, dysphagia
Images
Throat anatomy
References
Allen CT, Nussenbaum B, Merati AL. Acute and chronic laryngopharyngitis. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 61.
DeVault KR. Symptoms of esophageal disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 13.
Pandolfino JE, Kahrilas PJ. Esophageal neuromuscular function and motility disorders. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 44.
Wilcox CM. Gastrointestinal consequences of infection with human immunodeficiency virus. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 35.
Review Date 8/7/2023
Updated by: Michael M. Phillips, MD, Emeritus Professor of Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Swallowing Disorders