Myelofibrosis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Myelofibrosis
Myelofibrosis
Myelofibrosis is a disorder of the bone marrow in which the marrow is replaced by fibrous scar tissue.
Causes
Bone marrow is the soft, fatty tissue inside your bones. Stem cells are immature cells in the bone marrow that develop into all of your blood cells. Your blood is made of:
Red blood cells (which carry oxygen to your tissues)
White blood cells (which fight infection)
Platelets (which help your blood clot)
When the bone marrow is scarred, it cannot make enough blood cells.
Anemia
, bleeding problems, and a higher risk for infections may occur.
As a result, the liver and spleen try to make some of these blood cells. This causes these organs to swell.
The cause of myelofibrosis is often unknown. There are no known risk factors. When it occurs, it often develops slowly in people over age 50. Women and men are equally affected. There is an increased occurrence of this condition in Ashkenazi Jews.
Blood and bone marrow cancers, such as
myelodysplastic syndrome
,
leukemia
, and lymphoma, may also cause bone marrow scarring. This is called secondary myelofibrosis.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include any of the following:
Abdominal fullness
, pain, or feeling full before finishing a meal (because of  an enlarged spleen)
Bone pain
Easy bleeding,
bruising
Fatigue
Increased likelihood of getting an infection
Pale skin
Shortness of breath
with exercise
Weight loss
Night sweats
Low grade fever
Enlarged liver
Dry cough
Itchy skin
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms.
Tests that may be done include:
Complete blood count
(CBC) with blood smear to check different types of blood cells
Measuring tissue damage (
LDH enzyme level
)
Molecular testing
Bone marrow biopsy
to diagnose the condition and to check for bone marrow cancers
Treatment
Bone marrow or stem cell transplant
may improve symptoms, and may cure the disease. This treatment is usually considered for younger people.
Other treatment may involve:
Blood transfusions
and medicines to correct anemia
Radiation
and
chemotherapy
Targeted medicines
Removal of the spleen (
splenectomy
) if swelling causes symptoms, or to help with anemia
Outlook (Prognosis)
As the disease worsens, the bone marrow slowly stops working. Low platelet count leads to easy bleeding. Spleen swelling may get worse along with anemia.
The average survival of people with primary myelofibrosis is about 5 years. But some people survive for decades.
Possible Complications
Complications may include:
Development of
acute myelogenous leukemia
Infections
Bleeding
Blood clots
Liver failure
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Make an appointment with your provider if you have symptoms of this disorder. Seek medical care right away for uncontrolled bleeding, shortness of breath, or
jaundice
(yellow skin and whites of the eyes) that gets worse.
Alternative Names
Idiopathic myelofibrosis; Myeloid metaplasia; Agnogenic myeloid metaplasia; Primary myelofibrosis; Secondary myelofibrosis; Bone marrow - myelofibrosis
References
Gotlib J. Polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and primary myelofibrosis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 157.
Venugopal S, Najfeld V, Keyzner A, Jamal SME, Ronald H, Mascarenhas J. Primary myelofibrosis and chronic neutrophilic leukemia. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice
. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 70.
Review Date 6/17/2024
Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Bone Marrow Diseases