Open heart surgery: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Open heart surgery
Open heart surgery
Heart surgery is any surgery done on the heart muscle, valves, arteries, or the aorta and other large arteries connected to the heart.
The term "open heart surgery" means that you are connected to a heart-lung bypass machine, or bypass pump during surgery.
Your heart is stopped while you are connected to this machine.
This machine does the work of your heart and lungs while your heart is stopped for the surgery. The machine adds oxygen to your blood, moves blood through your body, and removes carbon dioxide.
Common types of open-heart surgery include:
Heart bypass surgery
(coronary artery bypass graft -- CABG)
Heart valve surgery
Surgery to
correct a heart defect present at birth
(congenital defect)
New procedures are being done on the heart through smaller cuts. Some new procedures are being done while the heart is still beating.
Alternative Names
Heart surgery - open
References
Bernstein D. General principles of treatment of congenital heart disease. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds.
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.
21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 461.
Ngu JMC, Rubens FD. Cardiopulmonary bypass: technique and pathophysiology. In: Sellke FW, del Nido PJ, Swanson SJ, eds.
Sabiston and Spencer Surgery of the Chest.
10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 65.
Omer S, Bakaeen FG. Acquired heart disease: coronary insufficiency. In: Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL, eds.
Sabiston Textbook of Surgery.
21st ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 60.
Review Date 4/16/2023
Updated by: Mary C. Mancini, MD, PhD, Cardiothoracic Surgeon, Shreveport, LA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Internal review and update on 02/03/2024 by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Heart Surgery