Beeswax poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Beeswax poisoning
Beeswax poisoning
Beeswax is wax from the honeycomb of bees. Beeswax poisoning occurs when someone swallows beeswax.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Beeswax can be harmful if it is swallowed.
Where Found
Sources of beeswax are:
Beeswax itself
Some candles
Some ointments applied to the skin
Symptoms
Beeswax is considered nonpoisonous, but it may cause a blockage in the intestines if someone swallows a large amount. If an ointment is swallowed, the medicine component may also cause side effects or poisoning.
Home Care
Do not make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of the product (ingredients, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
The person may not need to go to the emergency room.
If they do go, the provider will measure and monitor their vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
The provider may give the person a laxative. This will help move the wax quickly through the intestines and help prevent a bowel blockage.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Since beeswax is considered fairly nonpoisonous, recovery is very likely.
How well someone does depends on how much beeswax they swallowed and how quickly they receive treatment.
References
Davison K, Frank BL. Ethnobotany: plant-derived medical therapy. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, eds.
Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 68.
Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.