Chlorpromazine overdose: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Chlorpromazine overdose
Chlorpromazine overdose
Chlorpromazine is a prescription medicine used to treat psychotic disorders. It may also be used to prevent nausea and vomiting, and for other reasons.
This medicine may also change the metabolism and the effect of other medicines.
Chlorpromazine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Chlorpromazine can be poisonous in large amounts.
Where Found
Chlorpromazine is found in chlorpromazine hydrochloride.
Other medicines may also contain chlorpromazine.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of a chlorpromazine overdose in different parts of the body.
AIRWAYS AND LUNGS
No breathing
Rapid breathing
Shallow breathing
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Inability to urinate
Weak urine stream
EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT
Blurred vision
Difficulty swallowing
Drooling
Dry mouth
Sores on the gums, tongue, or in the throat
Stuffy nose
Yellow eyes
HEART AND BLOOD
High or very low blood pressure
Pounding heartbeat
Rapid, irregular heartbeat
MUSCLES, BONES AND JOINTS
Muscle spasms
Rapid, involuntary movements of the face (chewing, blinking, grimaces, and tongue movements)
Stiff muscles in the neck or back
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Agitation, irritability, confusion
Convulsions (seizures)
Disorientation, coma (lack of responsiveness)
Drowsiness
Fever
Low body temperature
Restlessness linked with repeated foot shuffling, rocking, or pacing (
akathisia
)
Tremor, motor tics that the person cannot control (
dystonia
)
Uncoordinated movement, slow movement, or shuffling (with long-term use or overuse)
Weakness
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Change in female menstrual pattern
SKIN
Bluish skin color
Hot skin
Rash
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Constipation
Loss of appetite
Nausea
Home Care
Seek medical help right away. DO NOT make a person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to do so.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
The person's age, weight, and condition
The name of the medicine and strength, if known
When it was swallowed
The amount swallowed
If the medicine was prescribed for the person
Poison Control
Your
local control poison center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.
Your health care provider will measure and monitor you vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Chest x-ray
CT scan (advanced brain imaging)
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Treatment may include:
Activated charcoal
Breathing support, including oxygen, tube through the mouth into the lungs, and breathing machine (ventilator)
Fluids through a vein (IV)
Laxative
Medicine to reverse the effects of the drug and treat symptoms
Outlook (Prognosis)
Chlorpromazine is fairly safe. Most likely, an overdose will only cause drowsiness and some side effects such as uncontrolled movements of the lips, eyes, head, and neck for a short time. These movements may continue if they are not treated quickly and correctly.
In rare cases, an overdose can cause more serious symptoms. Nervous system symptoms may be permanent. The most serious side effects are usually due to damage to the heart. If heart damage can be stabilized, recovery is likely. Life threatening heart rhythm disturbances may be difficult to treat, and may result in death. Survival past 2 days is usually a good sign.
References
Aronson JK. Chlorpromazine. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:274-275.
Monas J, Skolnik AB. Antipsychotics. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 150.
Review Date 7/1/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.