Postpartum depression: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Postpartum depression
Postpartum depression
Postpartum depression is moderate to severe
depression
in a woman after she has given birth. It may occur soon after delivery or up to a year later. Most of the time, it occurs within the first 3 months after delivery.
Causes
The exact causes of postpartum depression are unknown. Changes in hormone levels during and after pregnancy may affect a woman's mood. Many non-hormonal factors may also affect mood during this period:
Changes in your body from pregnancy and delivery
Changes in work and social relationships
Having less time and freedom for yourself
Lack of sleep
Worries about your ability to be a good mother
You may have a higher chance of postpartum depression if you:
Are under age 25 years
Currently use alcohol, take
illegal substances
, or smoke (these also cause serious health risks for the baby)
Did not plan the pregnancy, or had mixed feelings about the pregnancy
Had depression,
bipolar disorder
, or an
anxiety disorder
before your pregnancy, or with a past pregnancy
Had a stressful event during the pregnancy or delivery, including personal illness, death or illness of a loved one, a difficult or emergency delivery, premature delivery, or illness or birth defect in the baby
Have a close family member who has had depression or anxiety
Have a poor relationship with your significant other or are single
Have money or housing problems
Have little support from family, friends, or your spouse or partner
Symptoms
Feelings of anxiety, irritation, tearfulness, and restlessness are common in the week or two after you have your baby. These postpartum feelings are often called the "baby blues." They almost always go away soon, without the need for treatment.
Postpartum depression may occur when the baby blues do not fade away or when signs of depression start 1 or more months after childbirth.
The symptoms of postpartum depression are the same as the symptoms of depression that occurs at other times in life. Along with a sad or depressed mood, you may have some of the following symptoms:
Agitation or irritability
Changes in appetite
Feelings of worthlessness or guilt
Feeling like you are withdrawn or unconnected
Lack of pleasure or interest in most or all activities
Loss of concentration
Loss of energy
Problems doing tasks at home or work
Significant anxiety
Thoughts of death or
suicide
Trouble sleeping
A mother with postpartum depression may also:
Be unable to care for herself or her baby.
Be afraid to be alone with her baby.
Have negative feelings toward the baby or even think about harming the baby. (Although these feelings are scary, they are almost never acted on. Still, you should tell your health care provider about them right away.)
Worry intensely about the baby or have little interest in the baby.
Exams and Tests
There is no single test to diagnose postpartum depression. Diagnosis is based on the symptoms you describe to your provider.
Your provider may order blood or urine tests to check for a physical illness causing depression.
Treatment
A new mother who has any symptoms of postpartum depression should contact her provider right away to get help.
Here are some other tips:
Ask your partner, family, and friends for help with the baby's needs and in the home.
Do not hide your feelings. Talk about them with your partner, family, and friends.
Do not make any major life changes during pregnancy or right after giving birth.
Do not try to do too much, or to be perfect.
Make time to go out, visit friends, or spend time alone with your partner.
Rest as much as you can. Sleep when the baby is sleeping.
Talk with other mothers or join a support group.
The treatment for depression after birth often includes medicine, talk therapy, or both. Breastfeeding will play a role in what medicine your provider recommends. You may be referred to a mental health specialist. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and interpersonal therapy (IPT) are types of talk therapy that often help postpartum depression.
Support groups may be helpful, but they should not replace medicine or talk therapy if you have postpartum depression.
Having good social support from family, friends, and coworkers may help reduce the seriousness of postpartum depression.
Outlook (Prognosis)
Medicine and talk therapy can often successfully reduce or eliminate symptoms.
Possible Complications
Left untreated, postpartum depression can last for months or years.
The potential long-term complications are the same as in
major depression
. Untreated postpartum depression may put you at risk of harming yourself or your baby.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Contact your provider if you have any of the following:
Your baby blues do not go away after 2 weeks.
Symptoms of depression get more intense.
Symptoms of depression begin at any time after delivery, even many months later.
It is hard for you to perform tasks at work or home.
You cannot care for yourself or your baby.
You have thoughts of harming yourself or your baby.
You develop thoughts that are not based in reality, or you start hearing or seeing things that other people don't see.
Do not be afraid to seek help right away if you feel overwhelmed and are afraid that you may hurt your baby.
If you are thinking about hurting yourself or others, call or text 988 or chat
988lifeline.org
. You can also call 1-800-273-8255 (1-800-273-TALK). The 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline provides free and confidential support 24/7, anytime day or night.
You can also call 911 or the local emergency number or go to the hospital emergency room. DO NOT delay.
If someone you know has attempted suicide, call 911 or the local emergency number right away. DO NOT leave the person alone, even after you have called for help.
Prevention
Having good social support from family, friends, and coworkers may help reduce the seriousness of postpartum depression, but may not prevent it.
Women who had postpartum depression after past pregnancies may be less likely to develop postpartum depression again if they start taking antidepressant medicines after they deliver. Talk therapy may also be helpful in preventing depression.
Alternative Names
Depression - postpartum; Postnatal depression; Postpartum psychological reactions
References
American Psychiatric Association. Depressive disorders.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.
5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013:155-233.
Leval R, Nonacs RM, Wang B, Viguera AC, Cohen LS. Psychiatric illness during pregnancy and the post-partum period. In: Stern TA, Wilens TE, Fava M, eds.
Massachusetts General Hospital Comprehensive Clinical Psychiatry.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 30.
US Preventive Services Task Force, Barry MJ, Nicholson WK, et al. Screening for depression and suicide risk in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement.
JAMA.
2023;329(23):2057-2067. PMID: 37338872
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37338872/
.
Review Date 7/17/2024
Updated by: Fred K. Berger, MD, addiction and forensic psychiatrist, Scripps Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Postpartum Depression