Carbolic acid poisoning: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Carbolic acid poisoning
Carbolic acid poisoning
Carbolic acid is a sweet-smelling clear liquid. It is added to many different products. Carbolic acid poisoning occurs when someone touches or swallows this chemical.
This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.
Poisonous Ingredient
Phenol is the harmful substance in carbolic acid.
Where Found
Carbolic acid can be found in:
Adhesive dyes
Lubricating oils
Perfumes
Textiles
Various antiseptics
Various disinfectants
Various germicides
Other products may also contain carbolic acid.
Symptoms
Below are symptoms of carbolic acid poisoning in different parts of the body.
BLADDER AND KIDNEYS
Blue- or green-colored urine
Decreased urine output
No urine output
EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT
Severe burns in the mouth and food pipe (esophagus)
Yellow eyes
(jaundice)
STOMACH AND INTESTINES
Abdominal (stomach) pain - severe
Bloody stools
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
- possibly bloody
HEART AND BLOOD
Low blood pressure
(shock)
Rapid heart rate
LUNGS AND AIRWAYS
Deep, rapid breathing
Wheezing
Trouble breathing
(may be life threatening if inhaled)
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Coma
(decreased level of consciousness and lack of responsiveness)
Seizures
(convulsions)
Hyperactivity
Lack of alertness (stupor)
SKIN
Blue lips and fingernails
(cyanosis)
Burns
Yellow skin (jaundice)
WHOLE BODY
Excessive thirst
Heavy sweating
Home Care
Get medical help right away. Do not make the person throw up unless poison control or a health care provider tells you to.
If the person swallowed the carbolic acid, give them water or milk right away, if poison control or a provider tells you to.
Do not give anything to drink if the person has symptoms that make it hard to swallow. These include vomiting, convulsions, or a decreased level of alertness.
If the chemical is on the skin or in the eyes, flush with lots of water for at least 15 minutes.
Before Calling Emergency
Have this information ready:
Person's age, weight, and condition
Name of product (and ingredients and strength, if known)
Time it was swallowed
Amount swallowed
Poison Control
Your local
poison control center
can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.
This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
What to Expect at the Emergency Room
Take the container to the hospital with you, if possible.
The provider will measure and monitor the person's
vital signs
, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure.
Tests that may be done include:
Blood and urine tests
Bronchoscopy
-- camera down the throat to look for burns in the airways and lungs
Chest x-ray
Electrocardiogram
(ECG)
Endoscopy
-- camera down the throat to look for burns in the esophagus and the stomach
Treatment may include:
Fluids through a vein (by IV)
Laxative
Medicines to relieve pain
Skin creams to treat burns
Breathing support, including tube through the mouth into the lungs and connected to a
breathing machine
(ventilator)
Outlook (Prognosis)
How well someone does depends on how much carbolic acid was swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster medical help is given, the better the chance for recovery.
Damage continues to occur to the esophagus and stomach for several weeks after the poison was swallowed. Death may occur as long as a month later.
Alternative Names
Phenol poisoning; Phenylic acid poisoning; Hydroxybenzene poisoning; Phenic acid poisoning; Benzenol poisoning
References
Aronson JK. Phenols. In: Aronson JK, ed.
Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs
. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier; 2016:688-692.
Levine MD. Chemical injuries. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 55.
Review Date 11/2/2023
Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.