Myasthenia gravis: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
(
Lock
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
→
→
Myasthenia gravis
Myasthenia gravis
Myasthenia gravis is a neuromuscular disorder. Neuromuscular disorders involve the muscles and the nerves that control them.
Causes
Myasthenia gravis is an
autoimmune disorder
. An autoimmune disorder occurs when the immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue.
Antibodies
are proteins made by the body's immune system when it detects harmful substances. Antibodies may be produced when the immune system mistakenly considers healthy tissue to be a harmful substance, such as in the case of myasthenia gravis. In people with myasthenia gravis, the body produces antibodies that block the muscle cells from receiving messages (conveyed by neurotransmitters) from the nerve cells.
In some cases, myasthenia gravis is linked to tumors of the thymus (an organ of the immune system).
Myasthenia gravis can affect people at any age. It is most common in young women and older men.
Symptoms
Myasthenia gravis causes weakness of the voluntary muscles. These are muscles that you can control. Autonomic muscles of the heart and digestive tract are usually not affected. The muscle weakness of myasthenia gravis worsens with activity and improves with rest.
This muscle weakness can lead to a variety of symptoms, including:
Double vision
and
drooping eyelids
(ptosis) are the most common first symptoms
Breathing difficulty
because of weakness of the chest wall muscles
Chewing or swallowing difficulty, causing frequent gagging, choking, or drooling
Difficulty climbing stairs, lifting objects, or rising from a seated position
Difficulty talking
Drooping head
Facial paralysis
or weakness of the facial muscles
Fatigue
Hoarseness or changing voice
Difficulty maintaining steady gaze
Exams and Tests
Your health care provider will perform a physical exam. This includes a detailed nervous system (neurological) examination. This may show:
Muscle weakness, with eye muscles usually affected first
Weakness usually fluctuates and gets worse with exercise
Normal reflexes and feeling (sensation)
Tests that may be done include:
Blood test to check for
acetylcholine receptor antibodies
, and others, associated with this disease
CT
or
MRI
scan of the chest to look for a tumor
Nerve conduction studies
to test how fast electrical signals move through a nerve
Electromyography
(EMG) to test the health of the muscles and the nerves that control the muscles
Pulmonary function tests
to measure breathing and how well the lungs are functioning
Edrophonium test to see if this medicine reverses the symptoms for a short time
Treatment
There is no known cure for myasthenia gravis. Treatment may allow you to have periods without any symptoms (remission).
Lifestyle changes can often help you continue your daily activities. The following may be recommended:
Resting throughout the day
Using an eye patch if double vision is bothersome
Avoiding stress and heat exposure, which can make symptoms worse
Medicines that may be prescribed include:
Neostigmine or pyridostigmine to improve communication between the nerves and muscles
Prednisone and other medicines (such as azathioprine, cyclosporine, or mycophenolate mofetil) to suppress the immune system response if you have severe symptoms and other medicines have not worked well
Other immunological therapies target specific immune cells or inflammatory response
Crisis situations (myasthenic crisis) are attacks of weakness of the breathing muscles. These attacks can occur without warning when either too much or too little medicine is taken. These attacks usually last no longer than a few weeks. You may need to be admitted to the hospital, where you may need breathing assistance with a
ventilator
.
A procedure called plasmapheresis may also be used to help end the crisis. This procedure involves removing the clear part of the blood (plasma), which contains the antibodies. This may be replaced with donated plasma that is free of antibodies, or with other fluids. Plasmapheresis may also help reduce symptoms for 4 to 6 weeks and is often used before surgery.
A medicine called intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) may also be used.
Surgery to remove the thymus (thymectomy) may result in permanent remission or less need for medicines, especially when there is a tumor present.
If you have eye problems, your provider may suggest lens prisms to improve vision. Surgery may also be recommended to treat your eye muscles.
Physical therapy can help maintain your muscle strength. This is especially important for the muscles that support breathing.
Some medicines can worsen symptoms and should be avoided. Before taking any medicine, ask your provider whether it is OK for you to take it.
Support Groups
You can ease the stress of illness by joining a
myasthenia gravis support group
. Sharing with others who have common experiences and problems can help you not feel alone.
Outlook (Prognosis)
There is no cure, but long-term remission is possible. You may have to restrict some daily activities. People who have only eye symptoms (ocular myasthenia gravis), may develop generalized myasthenia over time.
A woman with myasthenia gravis can get pregnant, but careful prenatal care is important. The baby may be weak and require medicines for a few weeks after birth, but usually will not develop the disorder.
Possible Complications
The condition may cause life-threatening breathing or swallowing problems. This is called a myasthenic crisis.
People with myasthenia gravis are at higher risk for other autoimmune disorders, such as
thyrotoxicosis
,
rheumatoid arthritis
, and
systemic lupus erythematosus
(lupus).
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Call your provider if you develop symptoms of myasthenia gravis.
Go to the emergency room or call 911 or the local emergency number if you have breathing difficulty or swallowing problems.
Alternative Names
Neuromuscular disorder - myasthenia gravis
Images
Superficial anterior muscles
Ptosis - drooping of the eyelid
Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
References
Guptill JT, Sanders DB. Disorders of neuromuscular transmission. In:
Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds.
Bradley's and Daroff's
Neurology in Clinical Practice.
8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier;
2022:chap 108.
Kaminski HJ. Disorders of neuromuscular transmission. In: Goldman L,
Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine.
27th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier; 2024:chap 390.
Narayanaswami P, Sanders DB, Wolfe G, et al. International Consensus
Guidance for Management of Myasthenia Gravis: 2020 Update.
Neurology.
2021;96(3):114-122. PMID: 33144515
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33144515/
.
Review Date 4/16/2025
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Myasthenia Gravis