Travel and health
Skip to main content
Overview
Travellers may encounter various health risks during travel. The risks can depend on many things, including the health of the traveller, the type of travel, and the destination. Health risks can come from factors such as changes in temperature and humidity, air pollution, issues of safety and security, access to health and dental care services and products, exposure to infectious diseases, access to safe food and water, sanitation and hygiene standards, availability of facilities and equipment for disabled people, and local laws and customs.
International travel can be stressful. Travellers may be away from family and friends and may need to adjust to foreign cultures and languages. Coping with high levels of stress may cause physical, social and psychological problems. Changes to the circadian rhythm (e.g. jet lag) and sleep deprivation can trigger seizures in people with epilepsy, provoke migraine attacks and cause more behavioural symptoms in people living with dementia.
All individuals planning travel should seek information or advice on potential health risks before they travel. It is important for travellers to understand how best to avoid or minimize these risks, take appropriate preventive measures, and exercise necessary precautions before, during and after travel.
Before travel
Travellers should prepare themselves in several ways before departure. First, it is important to gather information about the potential health risks early in the planning stage. Travellers should also be aware of differences in local laws and customs, including those relating to substance use and sexual relationships.
Travellers should visit a travel clinic, preferably 4–8 weeks before departure or earlier, but it’s useful even if it’s very close to the departure date. There may be additional considerations for certain groups of travellers, including infants and young children, pregnant and breastfeeding women, older people, people with disabilities, and those who have underlying health conditions, including
mental, neurological and substance use conditions
.
Travellers are strongly advised to obtain comprehensive travel insurance as a matter of routine and to declare any underlying health conditions to their travel insurers.
Sufficient medical supplies, including prescribed medications, should be carried to cover the duration of the trip, including possible delays and change of plans. Toiletries should also be carried in sufficient quantity for the entire duration of the trip unless their availability at the travel destination is assured.
During and after travel
During travel
When travelling, always have important health documents with you, such as health insurance certificates and vaccine or malaria prophylaxis records. In some countries, some medications are illegal to carry (such as psychotropics), and travellers should have a letter written and signed by their doctor certifying the need to carry them. Have these documents ready to be presented if requested by officials.
Travellers should also:
continue to take medications for chronic health conditions, if applicable
be mindful of road safety
be mindful of food and water safety precautions
be mindful of the need for protection from extreme weather, such as heat waves.
After travel
Travellers should seek medical attention on their return home if they:
are ill in the weeks after they return home, particularly with fever, persistent diarrhoea, vomiting, jaundice, urinary disorders, skin disease or anogenital infection (genital warts);
received treatment for malaria while travelling;
may have been exposed during travel to an infectious disease, including sexually transmitted infections, even if they have no symptoms; or
have a previous health condition that gets worse.
Travellers should seek medical care immediately in these cases and not wait for a regularly scheduled consultation.
Providing health personnel with information on travel history, including vaccines and malaria prophylaxis taken before travel, can be helpful.
Fact sheets
Ambient (outdoor) air pollution
Diarrhoeal disease
Drinking-water
Drowning
Mental disorders
Mental health
Road traffic injuries
Vector-borne diseases
Zoonoses
Questions and answers
Chikungunya
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): Travel advice for the general public
Dengue and severe dengue
Ebola virus disease
Heatwaves: How to stay cool
Mpox
Yellow fever
Zika
Zika: Safe blood supply
Guidance
Travel advice
Disease Outbreak News (DONs)
Disease Outbreak News
News
All →
7 March 2024
Departmental update
Insights and recommendations for hosting mega-sporting events: Lessons from the FIFA 2026 World Cup 2026 webinar# 2: Security considerations
24 February 2023
Departmental update
SEARO Sub-regional Workshop on strengthening IHR activities and implementation at Ports of Entry
25 March 2021
Statement
Joint Statement on prioritization of COVID-19 vaccination for seafarers and aircrew
22 April 2020
Statement
A Joint Statement on medical certificates of seafarers, ship sanitation certificates and medical care of seafarers in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic
Latest publications
All →
6 September 2025
International travel and health: module 4: vaccine-preventable diseases and vaccines
Depending on the health profile of the traveller, the type of travel to be undertaken, and the place of transit and destination, travellers may face various...
Download
Read More
25 November 2024
International travel and health: module 3: malaria
Depending on the health profile of the traveller, the type of travel to be undertaken, and the place of transit and destination, travellers may face various...
Download
Read More
30 July 2024
International travel and health - module 1: general health risks and considerations for travellers
Depending on the health profile of the traveller, the type of travel to be undertaken, and the places of transit and destination, travellers may face various...
Download
Read More
30 July 2024
International travel and health - module 2: environmental health risks
Depending on the health profile of the traveller, the type of travel to be undertaken, and the place of transit and destination, travellers may face various...
Download
Read More
Our work
Managing health risks during mass gatherings
Minimizing health risks at airports, ports and ground crossings
Multimedia
All →
Infographic
Flyer – Health protection at points of entry: vector surveillance and control
Infographic
Flyer - Management of acute public health events on Board ships
Infographic
Flyer - Management of acute public health events in air transport
Infographic
Will I catch Zika if I travel?
Related health topics
Other
Alcohol
Substances
Drugs (psychoactive)
Physical environment
Food safety
Disasters
Heatwaves
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Physical environment
Road traffic injuries
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health
Physical environment
Ultraviolet radiation