Respiratory syncytial virus - Global
Skip to main content
Overview
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a common virus that causes infections of the upper and lower respiratory airways (including the nose, sinuses and lungs). Discovered in 1956, RSV is a ribonucleic acid (RNA) virus that belongs to the family
Paramyxoviridae
. It is classified into 2 subgroups, RSV-A and RSV-B. Both subgroups tend to co-circulate during each season and both can cause severe disease.
RSV is a leading cause of acute lower respiratory infections and associated hospitalizations in infants and children globally. Nearly all children will have experienced at least one RSV infection by their second year of life. In 2019, there were 33 million RSV-associated cases of acute lower respiratory airway infection, 3.6 million RSV-associated hospital admissions, and 101 400 RSV-attributable deaths in children under 5 years of age. Over 97% of pediatric RSV-related deaths occur in children living in low- and middle-income countries.
RSV infection in adults is generally mild and presents as low-level upper respiratory airway infections. However, older adults and those with chronic respiratory and/or cardiac conditions are more likely to experience severe disease. RSV-related complications include bronchiolitis (inflammation of the smaller airways in the lung), pneumonia, acute otitis media (infection of the middle ear) and conjunctivitis.
Symptoms
RSV is transmitted via droplets from the nose and throat of infected persons. The average incubation period from infection to symptoms is 4–6 days. Mild upper respiratory tract illness is most common, including symptoms and signs such as runny nose, sore throat, headache, fatigue and fever. In more severe cases, infection can lead to small airway obstruction due to accumulation of dead cells and mucus. Symptoms and signs consistent with lower respiratory tract infection include cough, shortness of breath, rapid breathing and wheezing. Very severe lung infection can result in low oxygen levels, respiratory muscle fatigue and death.
RSV infection and disease occurs in almost all infants before the age of 2 years and most cases of severe disease occur among previously healthy infants. However, some infants are at particularly high risk of severe disease, including very premature infants, and those with underlying lung and heart disease. RSV lower respiratory tract infection in early life might lead to long-term respiratory consequences, including repeat hospitalizations for respiratory illness during infancy, recurrent wheeze and possible impaired lung function into adulthood.
Adults are infected repeatedly with RSV throughout their lifetime. In general, younger adults have mild disease, but elderly people can develop severe disease.
Treatment
There is currently no treatment for RSV. Infections are usually self-limiting and resolve in 1–2 weeks. Healthy adults and infants infected with RSV typically do not require hospitalization, but medically attended RSV may require supportive care, which includes fever management, hydration, oxygen therapy and nutritional support.
Several immunization products are currently available to prevent severe RSV disease in infants and elderly adults. To protect infants, there is a vaccine given to pregnant women and persons late in pregnancy, which allows transfer of antibodies against RSV through the placenta to the unborn baby, who is then protected after birth. Another immunization product to protect babies is a long-acting monoclonal antibody that targets the RSV virus and is given as an intramuscular injection to the baby soon after birth. Both products can protect babies for approximately six months. For elderly adults, three RSV vaccines are now available that are equally effective.
Other vaccines and next generation monoclonal antibodies are in development.
Fact sheets
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
Questions and answers
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) immunization products
Resolutions and decisions
WHA76.3 Increasing access to medical oxygen
WHA73.9 Immunization Agenda 2030
Technical work
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
Norms and standards: Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) disease
Global Influenza Programme
News
All →
30 May 2025
News release
WHO outlines recommendations to protect infants against RSV – respiratory syncytial virus
19 March 2025
Departmental update
WHO prequalifies first maternal respiratory syncytial virus vaccine
18 April 2024
News release
Leading health agencies outline updated terminology for pathogens that transmit through the air
Latest publications
All →
13 June 2025
Respiratory syncytial virus sequencing considerations for an expanded Global Influenza Surveillance and...
In recent years, rapid progress has been made in the development of new pharmaceutical interventions against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), including...
Download
Read More
30 May 2025
WHO position paper on
immunization to protect
infants against respiratory
syncytial virus disease,...
Recommendations on the use of maternal respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccines and long-acting RSV monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to prevent severe RSV...
Download
Read More
6 December 2024
Meeting of the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization, September 2024: conclusions and recommendations
The Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization met on 23–26 September 2024. This report summarises their discussions, conclusions,...
Download
Read More
4 December 2024
Implementing the integrated sentinel surveillance of influenza and other respiratory viruses of epidemic...
Integrated surveillance in the context of the GISRS refers to expanding GISRS functions to include non-influenza respiratory viruses with epidemic or pandemic...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
5 August 2025
Manual for strengthening monitoring of respiratory virus immunization coverage - draft
The Manual for strengthening monitoring of respiratory virus immunization coverage provides technical guidance to support immunization programmes...
Download
Read More
19 December 2024
WHO Global Market Study on RSV Immunization Products
MI4A produces antigen-specific market studies, analyzing global demand and supply dynamics for products targeting a specific antigen.The Global Market...
Download
Read More
4 December 2024
Nonclinical and clinical evaluation of monoclonal antibodies and related products intended for the prevention...
Evaluating the safety and efficacy of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and related products intended for the prevention or treatment of infectious diseases...
Download
Read More
11 November 2020
Guidelines on the quality, safety and efficacy of respiratory syncytial virus vaccines, Annex 2, TRS...
Full version of the WHO Technical Report Series N° 1024Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a globally prevalent cause of lower respiratory...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
All →
3 October 2022
Dr Tedros: GISRS is a unique platform for flu and other respiratory viruses
Infographic
Screening for acute respiratory infection
Events
All →
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) genomic surveillance – how & why
13 August 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: update on influenza, COVID-19 and other respiratory viruses: focus on the winter season in the Northern Hemisphere
19 February 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: integrated sentinel surveillance for influenza and other respiratory viruses – standards and implementation
5 December 2024 13:00 – 14:00 CET
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Maternal health
Diseases and conditions
Pneumonia
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization