Road safety
Skip to main content
Overview
Road traffic crashes result in the deaths of approximately 1.19 million people around the world each year and leave between 20 and 50 million people with non-fatal injuries. More than half of all road traffic deaths occur among vulnerable road users, such as pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists.
Road traffic injuries are the leading cause of death for children and young adults aged 5–29. Yet two thirds of road traffic fatalities occur among people of working age (18–59 years). Nine in 10 fatalities on the roads occur in low- and middle-income countries, even though these countries have around 60% of the world's vehicles.
In addition to the human suffering caused by road traffic injuries, they also incur a heavy economic burden on victims and their families, both through treatment costs for the injured and through loss of productivity of those killed or disabled. More broadly, road traffic injuries have a serious impact on national economies, costing countries 3% of their annual gross domestic product.
Measures proven to reduce the risk of road traffic injuries and deaths exist and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development has set an ambitious target of reducing road traffic deaths and injuries by 50% by 2030.
Risk factors
Many factors increase both the risk of road traffic crashes and the risk of death or injury they result in.
Driving at higher speed significantly increases both the likelihood of a crash occurring and the severity of its consequences. For every 1% increase in mean speed there is a 4% increase in fatal crash risk. The risk of death for pedestrians hit by motorized vehicles also rises rapidly as speed increases. A pedestrian hit by a vehicle travelling at 65 kilometres per hour is 4.5 times more likely to die than those hit by a vehicle travelling at 50 kilometres per hour.
Driving under the influence of alcohol or other psychoactive substances presents significant risk factor for road traffic injuries. In the case of drink-driving, risk of road traffic injury increases significantly as the driver’s blood alcohol concentration goes up. In the case of drug-driving, the risk of road traffic injury increases to differing degrees depending on the psychoactive drug used.
There are a number of other significant risk factors:
the non-use of motorcycle helmets, seat-belts and child restraints
distraction, including the use of mobile phones, leading to impaired driving
unsafe vehicles and unsafe road infrastructure
inadequate post-crash care
inadequate enforcement of traffic laws.
WHO response
WHO works with Member States and partners to support road safety evaluation, implementation and planning. As the lead agency for road safety in the United Nations, WHO plays a key role in guiding global efforts by advocating for road safety at the highest political levels, compiling and sharing good practices and raising awareness of road safety.
WHO serves as the secretariat for the United Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021–2030 which aims to reduce road traffic deaths and injuries by at least 50% by 2030. This includes convening a global network of Heads of National Road Safety Agencies, producing Global Status Reports to track progress, and providing technical assistance.
WHO works with a range of partners to provide technical support to countries and works with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to share knowledge, experience and best practices. WHO chairs the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration, and organizes and hosts, with key partners, high profile advocacy events such as UN road safety weeks and the annual World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims.
Fact sheets
Road traffic injuries
Questions and answers
Children and road traffic injuries
Databases and tools
Road safety information on Global Health Observatory
GRSInfo App
Initiatives and groups
Bloomberg Initiative for Global Road Safety
Decade of action for road safety
UN Road Safety Collaboration
Global Network of Road Safety Legislators
Global Network of National Road Safety Leaders
Resolutions and decisions
Addressing the challenges of the UN Decade of action for road safety (WHA69.7)
Road safety and health (WHA57.10)
Prevention of road traffic accidents (WHA27.59)
Prevention of traffic accidents (WHA19.36)
Technical work
Social determinants of health
News
All →
19 November 2025
Departmental update
Second WHO-trained journalist wins road safety journalism award in Ghana
29 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO trains journalists to reshape road safety news coverage in Latin America
18 June 2025
Departmental update
Jordan’s new drink-driving law will save lives
28 May 2025
Departmental update
Road safety takes centre stage at world’s leading transport forum
Our work
Decade of action for road safety  2021-2030
Advocating for road safety
Improving care of the injured
Developing global targets for road safety risk factors and service delivery mechanisms
Latest publications
All →
8 May 2025
Promoting walking and cycling: a toolkit of policy options
This toolkit presents a compendium of policy options for walking and cycling, highlighting the multiple benefits that promoting and enabling safe walking...
Download
Read More
17 December 2024
Global status report on road safety 2023: country and territory profiles
The country and territory profile report accompanies the Global status report on road safety 2023 and is the last of the  three report-related products...
Download
Read More
2 September 2024
WHO South-East Asia Regional status report on road safety: Towards safer and sustainable mobility
The WHO South-East (SE) Asia Region, home to over a quarter of the world’s population, faces unique challenges when it comes to reducing road traffic...
Download
Read More
23 November 2023
Speed management: a road safety manual for decision-makers and practitioners, 2nd edition
Managing speed is key to improving road safety. The speed at which a vehicle travels influences the risk of a crash, the severity of the injuries received...
Download
Read More
Campaigns
UN Global Road Safety Week
World Bicycle Day
World Day of Remembrance for road traffic victims
Events
All →
Webinar Transforming and Harmonizing Road Safety in Thailand: Shared Spaces for Children, Pedestrians, Cyclists and Vehicles
15 May 2025 13:00 – 15:00 Thailand Time
Global webinar: 8th UN Global Road Safety Week “Make Walking and Cycling Safe”
12 May 2025 13:00 – 14:30 CET
8th UN Global Road Safety Week: Streets for life  #MakeWalkingSafe #MakeCyclingSafe
12 – 18 May 2025
Feature stories
All →
13 November 2025
Truth, trust and tech: Asian journalists tool up to tackle road safety
Videos
All →
16 November 2025
World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims 2025
28 April 2025
Make walking and cycling safe: 8th UN Global Road Safety Week
13 November 2024
World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims 2024: Dr Etienne Krug, WHO
13 December 2023
Launch of Global status report on road safety 2023
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Health systems
Emergency and critical care
Human behaviour
Physical activity
Physical environment
Environmental health
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases