Chemical incidents
Skip to main content
Overview
A chemical incident is the uncontrolled release of a toxic substance, potentially resulting in harm to public health and the environment. Chemical incidents can occur as a result of natural events, or as a result of accidental or intentional events. These incidents can be sudden and acute or have a slow onset when there is a ‘silent’ release of a chemical. They can also range from small releases to full-scale major emergencies.
The term “chemical incident” might refer to anthropogenic or technological events, including:
an explosion at a factory that stores or uses chemicals
contamination of the food or water supply with a chemical
an oil spill
a leak from a storage unit during transportation
deliberate release of chemicals in conflict or terrorism
an outbreak of disease that is associated with a chemical exposure.
Chemical incidents arising from natural sources include volcanos, earthquakes and forest fires. An estimated 65 000 people died due to technological events between 2009-2018.
As the production and use of chemicals continues to increase worldwide the health sector must expand its traditional roles and responsibilities to be able to address the public health and medical issues associated with the use of chemicals and their health effects.
Impact
Chemical incidents, especially acts of terrorism, may also cause fear and anxiety in populations, as well as injury from fire, explosion or toxicity. Depending on the chemical exposure, symptoms may present themselves differently.
In general, the adverse health outcomes to toxic chemical exposure may be:
effects that are local or arise at the site of contact with the chemical, such as bronchoconstriction from respiratory irritants, or irritation of the skin and eyes by gases, liquids and solids;
effects that are systemic or affect organ systems remote from the site of absorption, such as depression of the central nervous system from inhalation of solvents, or necrosis of the liver from the inhalation of carbon tetrachloride; and
effects on mental health arising from real or perceived releases, which depend on the psychosocial stress associated with an incident.
The time elapsing between exposure and the onset of symptoms can vary:
Some effects, for example eye and respiratory irritation or central nervous system depression, can occur rapidly, within minutes or hours of exposure.
Other effects, for example congenital malformations or cancers, may take months or years to appear.
WHO Response
WHO works closely with countries and partners to monitor and report on their emergency preparedness capacities for all hazards, including for chemical incidents. Surveillance of diseases of possible chemical etiology is a daily element in WHO’s outbreak alert and response activities.
WHO also convenes regional meetings to strengthen the global network of poison centres and thus facilitate emergency responses to chemical incidents. Guidance and training materials to strengthen preparedness for chemical incidents and emergencies have been developed in collaboration with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the Inter-Organization Programme for the Sound Management of Chemicals, and relevant organizations in the United Nations system.
Fact sheets
Dioxins
Food safety
Mercury
Lead poisoning
White phosphorus
Questions and answers
Chemical release and oil fires
What is WHO's role in emergencies?
Disease outbreak news
Latest DONs
Resolutions and decisions
WHA69.4 The role of the health sector in the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management towards the 2020 goal and beyond
WHA 64.10 Strengthening national health emergency and disaster management capacities and resilience of health systems
WHA 55.16 Global public health response to natural occurrence, accidental release or deliberate use of biological and chemical agents or radio-nuclear material that affect health
Technical work
Health Emergencies
Environment, Climate Change and Health
Chemical Safety and Health
Latest publications
All →
30 November 2023
Case study: managing the public health impact of chemical incidents in the Republic of Korea
The Republic of Korea has fortified its response to chemical incidents, aligning with WHO guidelines and the International Health Regulations. A robust...
Download
Read More
8 December 2021
WHO Human Health Risk Assessment Toolkit: Chemical Hazards, second edition
The purpose of the WHO human health risk assessment toolkit: chemical hazards is to provide its users with guidance to identify, acquire and use the information...
Download
Read More
13 July 2021
Manual for investigating suspected outbreaks of illnesses of possible chemical etiology: guidance for...
This manual describes methods for investigating
clusters or outbreaks that may be of chemical origin and
describes the importance of a structured, coordinated,
collaborative...
Download
Read More
4 May 2020
Continuing essential SRMNCAH health services during COVID-19 pandemic
This document builds upon the previous Regional Guidance 1 published on 17 April 2020, which
provided high-level guidance to countries for continuing...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Managing health risks during mass gatherings
Minimizing health risks at airports, ports and ground crossings
Strengthening national emergency preparedness
Rapidly detecting and responding to health emergencies
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Basic equipment for decontamination
Infographic
Signs and symptoms of chemical exposures
Infographic
Decontamination steps
Infographic
Initial management of patients flowchart
Related health topics
Other
Biological weapons
Physical environment
Chemical safety
Physical environment
Deliberate events
Socio-political determinants
International Health Regulations
Disasters
Radiation emergencies