Tetanus
Skip to main content
Overview
Tetanus is a serious illness contracted through exposure to the spores of the bacterium,
Clostridium tetani
, which live in soil, saliva, dust and manure. The bacteria can enter the body through a deep cuts, wounds or burns affecting the nervous system. The infection leads to painful muscle contractions, particularly of the jaw and neck muscle, and is commonly known as “lockjaw”.
People of all ages can get tetanus but the disease is particularly common and serious in newborn babies and their mothers when the mother is unprotected from tetanus by the vaccine, tetanus toxoid. Tetanus occurring during pregnancy or within 6 weeks of the end of pregnancy is called maternal tetanus, while tetanus occurring within the first 28 days of life is called neonatal tetanus.
The disease remains an important public health problem in many parts of the world, but especially in low-income countries or districts, where immunization coverage is low and unclean birth practices are common. WHO estimates that in 2018 (the latest year for which estimates are available), 25 000 newborns died from neonatal tetanus, 88% reduction from the situation in 2000.
Symptoms
Nearly all cases of tetanus occur in people who have never been vaccinated or in adults who have not kept up to date on their booster shots.
Signs and symptoms of tetanus appear anytime from 3 to 21 days after tetanus bacteria enter the body through a wound. Most cases occur within 14 days.
Symptoms can include:
jaw cramping or the inability to open the mouth
muscle spasms often in the back, abdomen and extremities
sudden painful muscle spasms often triggered by sudden noises
trouble swallowing
seizures
headache
fever and sweating
changes in blood pressure or fast heart rate.
In neonatal tetanus, symptoms include muscle spasms, which are often preceded by the newborn’s inability to suck or breastfeed, and excessive crying.
Tetanus is diagnosed on the basis of clinical features and does not require laboratory confirmation. Tetanus requires treatment in a medical facility, often in a referral hospital. People who recover from tetanus do not have natural immunity and can be infected again and therefore need to be immunized.
Prevention
Tetanus can be prevented through immunization with tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccines (TTCV), which are included in routine immunization programmes globally and administered during antenatal care contacts.
To be protected throughout life, WHO recommends that an individual receives 6 doses (3 primary plus 3 booster doses) of TTCV. The 3-dose primary series should begin as early as 6 weeks of age, with subsequent doses given with a minimum interval of 4 weeks between doses.
The 3 booster doses should preferably be given during the second year of life (12–23 months), at 4–7 years of age, and at 9–15 years of age. Ideally, there should be at least 4 years between booster doses.
There are many kinds of vaccines used to protect against tetanus:
diphtheria and tetanus (DT) vaccines
diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (whooping cough) (DTaP) vaccines
tetanus and diphtheria (Td) vaccines
tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis (Tdap) vaccines.
Neonatal tetanus can be prevented by immunizing women of reproductive age with TTCV, either during pregnancy or outside of pregnancy. Additionally, robust medical practices can also prevent tetanus disease including clean delivery and cord care during childbirth, and proper wound care for surgical and dental procedures.
Fact sheets
Tetanus
Immunization coverage
Questions and answers
Should tetanus immunizations be given to survivors with injuries in emergency situations?
Questions and answers on vaccines
Databases and tools
Diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP3) immunization coverage
Protection at birth (PAB) against tetanus
Initiatives and groups
Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus Elimination
Resolutions and decisions
WHA70.14 Strengthening immunization to achieve the goals of the global vaccine action plan
WHA65.17 Global vaccine action plan
Technical work
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
Maternal and Child Health
News
All →
15 July 2025
Joint News Release
Global childhood vaccination coverage holds steady, yet over 14 million infants remain unvaccinated – WHO, UNICEF
15 July 2019
News release
20 million children miss out on lifesaving measles, diphtheria and tetanus vaccines in 2018
21 April 2016
News release
World Immunization Week 2016: Immunization game-changers should be the norm worldwide
21 April 2015
News release
Global vaccination targets ‘off-track’ warns WHO
Latest publications
All →
8 November 2023
Analysis and use of health facility data - Facilitator guide: Companion exercises to strengthen analysis...
This facilitator guide is a companion to the guidance Analysis and use of health facility data: guidance for maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health...
Download
Read More
8 November 2023
Analysis and use of health facility data: Companion exercises to strengthen analysis and use of health...
This exercise book is a companion to the guidance Analysis and use of health facility data: guidance for maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health...
Download
Read More
8 November 2023
Analysis and use of health facility data: guidance for maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health...
This guidance describes a catalogue of indicators for maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health (MNCAH) that can be monitored through health management...
Download
Read More
17 November 2020
Progress Toward Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus Elimination - Worldwide, 2000–2018
Maternal and neonatal tetanus1
remains a
major public health problem, with an
80–100% case-fatality rate among neonates,
especially in areas...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
All →
25 April 2020
WHO: Why should I get vaccinated?
Infographic
Five facts on vaccines
Feature stories
All →
4 April 2025
Fatima: crossing deserts to protect mothers and newborns in Pakistan
Events
All →
Review by the Technical Advisory Group on Innovations in Male Circumcision (TAG) of additional documentation relating to the safety of male circumcision methods
10 January 2020
Technical Advisory Group on Innovations in Male Circumcision (TAG) of additional documentation relating to the safety of male circumcision methods
10 January 2020
WHO Informal consultation on tetanus and voluntary medical male circumcision
10 January 2020
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Child health
Populations and demographics
Newborn health
Diseases and conditions
Pertussis
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization