Energy and health
Skip to main content
Overview
Energy and health are inextricably linked. Access to clean, sustainable and affordable energy, outlined in the seventh Sustainable Development Goal (SDG 7), plays a crucial role in advancing health (SDG 3). Energy is also critical for achieving almost all other global goals that include eradication of poverty (SDG 1), opportunities for quality education (SDG 4), achievement of gender equality (SDG 5), access to clean water (SDG 6), jobs security and economic growth (SDG 8) and combat of climate change (SDG 13).
The links between energy and health are particularly evident in homes and health-care facilities. Access to clean and sustainable energy in homes is essential to protect people’s health from household air pollution due to the use of polluting stoves and fuels such as coal and biomass. Access to clean and reliable energy in health-care facilities is important to ensure the delivery of essential health care services for disease prevention and treatment.
Impact
Globally, 2.4 billion people lack access to clean fuels and technologies for cooking. Household air pollution, emitted from the use of polluting stoves and fuels, is a cause of some 3.2 million deaths annually. Women and children in particular are at greater health and livelihood risks since they are often tasked with cooking and collecting fuelwood. Health burdens are even greater when the use of polluting energy for other purposes (e.g., space heating, lighting) are included.
Recent statistics show population growth currently outpaces increases in energy access in some regions, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. It remains the only region in which the number of people without access to clean fuels and technologies is rising. Only about 1 in 5 people in sub-Saharan Africa (17%) has access to clean cooking. Overall, more people without access to clean fuels and technologies reside in sub-Saharan Africa than in any other region, with around 83% of the population (about 900 million people) in the region lacking access to clean cooking.
Access to energy also plays a critical role in the functionality of health-care facilities and the quality, accessibility and reliability of health services delivered to all.
Yet, an estimated 1 billion people globally are served by health facilities without electricity. Around 25% of health-care facilities in 11 sub-Saharan African countries are estimated to have no access to electricity. While most large hospitals have access, rates drop dramatically for rural and remote clinics.
WHO Response
Unless rapid action is taken, the world will fall short of the universal access target for clean cooking, leaving more than one fifth (24%) of the population still lacking access in 2030, making them vulnerable to health and other consequences. Scaling up the adoption to clean cooking solutions is needed through awareness raising, policies, financing, innovative delivery models and technology development.
Furthermore, electricity is necessary for the operation of critically needed medical devices such as vaccine refrigerators and surgical emergency, laboratory and diagnostic equipment as well as for the operation of basic amenities such as lighting, clean water supply, cooling, ventilation, space heating and communications.
Electricity is critical to health improvement and health protection and in many cases, it can make the difference between life and death. Through integrated approaches to health and energy challenges, WHO works towards accelerating access to clean cooking and electricity for health-care facilities. By working closely with the energy sector, the health sector can make critical steps in achieving health targets for non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and pneumonia prevention, vaccine coverage, digital health as well as improve emergency preparedness and response.
Fact sheets
Household air pollution
Electricity in health-care facilities
Databases and tools
Air pollution and health training toolkit for health workers
Global Health Observatory - Air Pollution
Household Energy Database
Household energy policy repository
Total Burden of Disease from Household and Ambient Air Pollution
Global Database of Household Air Pollution Measurements
Compendium of WHO and Other UN Guidance on Health and Environment
Harmonized Health Facility Assessment (HHFA)
Initiatives and groups
Health and Energy Platform of Action (HEPA)
High-Level Coalition on Health and Energy
Strategic Roadmap to promote healthier populations through clean and sustainable energy
Health Resources and Services Availability Monitoring System (HeRAMS)
SDG 11.6.2 Working Group
Resolutions and decisions
Health and the environment: draft road map for an enhanced global response to the adverse effects of air pollution (WHA69.18)
Health and the environment: addressing the health impact of air pollution (WHA68.8)
Technical work
Air Quality, Energy and Health
Environment, Climate Change and Health
News
All →
25 June 2025
Joint News Release
Energy access has improved, yet international financial support still needed to boost progress and address disparities
29 July 2024
Departmental update
WHO announces the 2024 updated Compendium of interventions on environmental health
25 June 2024
Departmental update
Health consequences of air pollution on populations
12 June 2024
Departmental update
Progress on basic energy access reverses for first time in a decade
Latest publications
All →
17 October 2025
WHO strategic approach on air quality, energy access and health
WHO, as the coordinating authority on international health, supports countries in protecting public health through evidence-based policies and actions....
Download
Read More
2 October 2025
Land use planning: sectoral solutions for air pollution and health
Exposure to air pollution and its associated health impacts are affected by land use practices including their regulation and enforcement. Understanding...
Download
Read More
4 September 2025
Green spaces: sectoral solutions for air pollution and health
Exposure to green spaces is widely associated with health benefits, including mental (e.g. reduced risk of depression and anxiety), physical (e.g. improved...
Download
Read More
4 September 2025
Understanding the health impacts of sand and dust storms
Sand and dust storms (SDS) result from turbulent winds that raise large quantities of particles from the ground into the air in emission areas. Emission...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
25 June 2025
2025 Tracking SDG7 Report
Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report 2025 finds that almost 92% of the world’s population now has basic access to electricity. Although this...
Download
Read More
25 June 2025
2025 Tracking SDG7 Report: Executive Summary
The Energy Progress Report 2025 finds that almost 92% of the world’s population now has basic access to electricity Although this is an...
Download
Read More
8 August 2024
Concept Note: Second global conference on air pollution and health
The Global conference on air pollution and health: Accelerating action for clean air, clean energy access and climate change mitigation will highlight...
Download
Read More
17 June 2024
Tracking SDG7: The Energy Progress Report 2024 - Executive Summary
SDG 7 is to ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy. The goal includes reaching universal access to electricity and clean...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Supporting country programmes
Strengthening health services with quality
Estimating environmental health impacts
Capacity building and training materials
Synthesizing evidence and knowledge on air pollution
Working with partners
Improving service access and quality
Building capacity on climate change and human health
Understanding the problem
Feature stories
All →
6 October 2021
Launch of WHO's Household Energy Policy Repository
6 September 2021
Transitioning to cleaner cooking
23 July 2020
Actionables for a healthy recovery from COVID-19
26 May 2020
WHO Manifesto for a healthy recovery from COVID-19
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Air pollution can affect the whole body
Infographic
Particulate matters and its health impacts
Infographic
Wildfires: regulation and controlled burning
Infographic
Wildfires: health impacts and actions
Videos
All →
11 August 2023
HEPA: Accelerating Access to Electricity in Health-Care Facilities
11 August 2023
HEPA - Accelerating Access to Clean Cooking
27 July 2023
Overview Video: Clean Household Energy Solutions Toolkit (CHEST)
5 January 2023
Training Video: Standards for Stove Performance
Campaign
BreatheLife
Learn more
Events
All →
Webinar: Evidence on air pollution, energy access, climate change and health: Launch of Phase 2 of WHO’s Science and Policy Summaries (SPS)
4 September 2025 14:00 – 15:15 CET
A spotlight on Paris - a dialogue with Mayor Anne Hidalgo on promoting health, clean air, and climate resilience
25 July 2025 16:30 – 17:30 CET
Webinar: Launch of WHO’s Science and Policy Summaries (SPS) on Air Quality, Energy and Health
17 July 2025 14:00 – 15:15 CET
Related health topics
Physical environment
Air pollution
Populations and demographics
Child health
Physical environment
Children's environmental health
Disasters
Climate change
Physical environment
Environmental health
Health interventions
Health impact assessment
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Other
Universal health coverage