Radiation
Skip to main content
Overview
Radiation is energy that travels in the form of waves or particles and is part of our everyday environment. People are exposed to radiation from cosmic rays, as well as to radioactive materials found in the soil, water, food, air and also inside the body.
Human-made radiation sources are widely used in medicine, industry, and research. There are two types of radiation: ionizing and non-ionizing radiation.
Ionizing radiation
Ionizing radiation is a type of energy released by atoms that travels in the form of electromagnetic waves (gamma or X-rays) or particles (neutrons, beta or alpha). Ionizing radiation can remove electrons from the atoms, i.e. they can ionize atoms. In terms of natural radiation sources, there are more than 60 different naturally occurring radioactive materials present in the environment, with radon gas being the highest contributor to people’s exposure.
Artificial radiation sources are used for nuclear power generation and many other industrial and research applications, with the medical use of ionizing radiation being today the highest contributor to people’s exposure (e.g. diagnostic radiology, image-guided interventions, nuclear medicine and radiotherapy).
Non-ionizing radiation
Non-ionizing radiation is radiation in the part of the electromagnetic spectrum where there is insufficient energy to cause ionization. It includes electric and magnetic fields, radio waves, microwaves, and optical radiation, which consists of infrared, visible, and ultraviolet radiation.
Non-ionizing radiation encompasses both natural and human-made sources of electromagnetic fields. Electrical power supplies and appliances are the most common sources of low frequency electric and magnetic fields in our living environment. Everyday sources of radiofrequency electromagnetic fields include telecommunications, broadcasting antennas and microwave ovens.
Optical radiation technologies, such as lasers, light bulbs and UV lamps, are used in industry, research and medicine. Non-ionizing radiation also encompasses mechanical waves such as infrasound and ultrasound.
Fact sheets
Ionizing radiation and health effects
Radon
Questions and answers
5G mobile networks and health
Radioactivity in food after a nuclear emergency
Radiation and Health
Radiation: Electromagnetic fields
Use of potassium iodide for thyroid protection during nuclear or radiological emergencies
Databases and tools
The Global Health Observatory: Radon database
The Global Health Observatory: Electromagnetic fields
The Global Health Observatory: Ultraviolet radiation
Initiatives and groups
BioDoseNet
The international EMF project
Global initiative on radiation safety in health care settings
INTERSUN programme
Radiation emergency medical preparedness and assistance network (REMPAN)
Resolutions and decisions
A71/10 Health, environment and climate change: report by the Director-General
WHA 25. Development of the medical use of ionizing radiation
WHA 76.5 Strengthening diagnostics capacity
WHA 75.25 Standardization of medical devices nomenclature
WHA 78.13 Strengthening medical imaging capacity
WHA 78.28 Effects of nuclear war on public health
Technical work
Radiation and health
News
All →
24 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO unveils health and environment scorecards for 194 countries
3 July 2025
News release
Readout on WHO participation in global nuclear emergency exercise
12 June 2025
Departmental update
WHO’s “Beat the Heat” initiative making strides to protect workers and event participants from extreme heat and related environmental hazards
29 July 2024
Departmental update
WHO announces the 2024 updated Compendium of interventions on environmental health
Latest publications
All →
10 July 2024
Enhancing radiation safety culture in health care: guidance for health care providers
Radiation safety culture in health care encompasses every action taken to improve the protection and safety of patients and personnel involved in medical...
Download
Read More
9 February 2024
Exercise JADE 2023: report
All States Parties to the International Health Regulations (‎IHR)‎ 2005 must appoint a National IHR Contact Point (‎NFP)‎ responsible for...
Download
Read More
4 October 2023
Sustainable management of radiotherapy facilities and equipment
Following adoption of resolutions WHA60.29 on health technologies and WHA70.12 (1,2) on cancer prevention and
control, the World Health Organization...
Download
Read More
17 May 2023
WHO presence in countries, territories and areas: 2023 report: key highlights
This document presents highlights of the WHO presence in countries, territories and areas: 2023 report, which provides
an overview of WHO’s presence,...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Enhancing radiation safety in health care
Mitigating health consequences of Chernobyl
Overcoming health consequences of Fukushima nuclear accident
Raising awareness on ultraviolet radiation
Features
All →
13 April 2022
Ensuring radiological imaging is ethically provided: new WHO policy brief
28 May 2021
Decades of service of Ukrainian researchers in radiation medicine
Events
All →
Webinar on Ensuring safe care for every newborn and child:
A radiation protection perspective
17 September 2025 12:30 – 14:00 CET
Webinar series: Exposure due to radionuclides in food in non-emergency situations
2 – 30 April 2025
Webinar on Improving diagnosis for patient safety in medical imaging
17 September 2024 12:00 – 13:30 CET
Infographics
All →
Infographic
500 actions to take, including 35 interventions to protect people from UV and other types of radiation
Infographic
X-ray guided interventions in Children : What do we need to know? (leaflet)
Infographic
Computed tomography in children: what do we need to know? (poster)
Infographic
X-ray exams in Children : What do we need to know?
Videos
All →
17 September 2025
Ensuring safe care for every newborn and child: A radiation protection perspective - WPSD25 Webinar
18 September 2024
Improving diagnosis for patient safety in medical imaging - WHO Webinar World Patient Safety Day 24
18 September 2023
World Patient Safety Day 2023 – Engaging patients for medical radiation safety
5 February 2023
National Stockpiles for Radiological and Nuclear Emergencies: Policy Advice - WHO Webinar 27.01.2023
Related health topics
Non-communicable diseases
Cancer
Disasters
Climate change
Physical environment
Electromagnetic fields
Socio-political determinants
International Health Regulations
Physical environment
Occupational health
Disasters
Radiation emergencies
Substances
Radon
Substances
Tobacco
Physical environment
Ultraviolet radiation