Cholera
Skip to main content
Overview
Cholera is an acute diarrhoeal infection caused by eating or drinking food or water that is contaminated with the bacterium
Vibrio cholerae
. Cholera remains a global threat to public health and is an indicator of inequity and lack of social development. Researchers have estimated that every year, there are 1.3 to 4.0 million cases of cholera, and 21 000 to 143 000 deaths worldwide due to the infection.
Cholera is an extremely serious disease that can cause severe acute watery diarrhoea with severe dehydration. It takes between 12 hours and 5 days for a person to show symptoms after consuming contaminated food or water. Cholera affects both children and adults and can kill within hours if untreated.
Most people infected with
Vibrio cholerae
do not develop any symptoms, although the bacteria are present in their faeces for 1-10 days after infection. This means the bacteria are shed back into the environment, potentially infecting other people.
Cholera is often predictable and preventable. It can ultimately be eliminated where access to clean water and sanitation facilities, as well as good hygiene practices, are ensured and sustained for the whole population.
Prevention and control
Measures for the prevention of cholera mostly consist of providing clean water and proper sanitation to populations who do not yet have access to basic services, as well as vaccination with Oral Cholera Vaccines. Health education and good food hygiene are also essential.
Communities should be reminded of basic hygienic behaviours. These include the need to always wash hands with soap after defecation and before handling food or eating, as well as safe preparation and conservation of food. Strengthening surveillance and early warning systems are important measures to allow detection of the first cases in an outbreak and to put in place control measures as quickly as possible.
Preventing and controlling cholera requires interventions beyond the health sector and it is vital to engage with partners across other sectors. The development and implementation of multi-sectoral cholera control plans is a useful mechanism to bring together all relevant sectors, and forge lines of communication and coordination that are valuable beyond cholera control.
Vaccines
Since the creation of the global stockpile in 2013, more than 50 million doses of Oral cholera vaccines (OCV) have been successfully used in various settings through mass campaigns. OCV is a tool that is used in addition to classic cholera control measures. It should be systematically considered in both endemic cholera hotspots as well as during outbreaks and emergencies.
OCV are safe and effective and are just one tool in a much larger toolbox that includes sustainable safe water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH), but serve as a critical bridge to these longer-term efforts.
Fact sheets
Cholera
Sanitation
Questions and answers
Cholera outbreaks
Databases and tools
Cholera and acute watery diarrhoea outbreaks
Cholera dashboards
Cholera kits 2020
Cholera outbreak toolbox
Cholera surveillance supporting tools - Global Taskforce on Cholera Control
Priority Areas for Multisectoral Interventions (PAMIs) dashboard
Initiatives and groups
International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision
Resolutions and decisions
Cholera prevention and control (WHA71.4)
Cholera: mechanism for control and prevention (WHA64.15)
Training
Cholera training resources
Technical work
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
Oral cholera vaccine
International coordination of cholera vaccine supplies
Risk communication
News
All →
30 October 2025
Departmental update
Bangladesh: from outbreak to preparedness: protecting Rohingya communities against cholera
12 September 2025
News release
Cholera kills more people for second consecutive year, while prevention and treatment available
7 July 2025
Departmental update
New website on cholera control goes live
24 February 2025
Departmental update
WHO and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia sign agreements in support of health priorities
Publications
All →
5 September 2025
Global situation report for cholera, 2024
“WHO’s latest global update on cholera, published in the Weekly Epidemiological Record indicates that in 2024, 60 countries reported more than...
Download
Read More
11 December 2024
Clinical tools for cholera treatment facilities
This collection of tools provides reference materials for facilities treating patients with cholera. The included tables and flowcharts can be used as...
Download
Read More
23 September 2024
Water, sanitation and hygiene and infection prevention and control measures for infectious diarrhoea...
This operational guide addresses water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), food safety management, and infection prevention and control (IPC) measures that...
Download
Read More
21 August 2024
WHO SEAR 17th Epidemiological Bulletin 2024
This epidemiological bulletin aims to provide the situation of key infectious diseases in the WHO South-East Asia region to inform risk assessments and...
Download
Read More
Our work
Supporting cholera outbreak response
Preparing and preventing epidemics and pandemics
Preventing and controlling cholera in endemic countries
Hosting the GTFCC secretariat
Feature stories
All →
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
17 June 2025
WHO response to challenging cholera outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
5 June 2025
Donors making a difference: cholera
28 February 2025
Donors making a difference: community engagement to promote, provide and protect the health and well-being of all
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Cholera - What you need to know
Infographic
Cholera 99% survive
Infographic
Contaminated water and sanitation
Infographic
WHO cholera kits
Videos
All →
15 March 2023
Cholera Treatment Centers help save lives in Malawi
21 October 2022
Shortage of cholera vaccines
2 April 2019
Water, sanitation and hygiene for cholera prevention
14 June 2017
Background on revised cholera kits
Campaign
World Immunization Week
24 - 30 April
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Diarrhoea
Physical environment
Environmental health
Physical environment
Food safety
Socio-political determinants
International Health Regulations
Socio-political determinants
Social determinants of health
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)