Violence against women
Skip to main content
Overview
Violence against women – particularly intimate partner violence and sexual violence – is a major public and clinical health problem and a violation of women's human rights. It is rooted in and perpetuates gender inequalities.
Globally 1 in 3 women experience physical and/or sexual violence in their lifetime, mostly by an intimate partner. This is a stark reminder of the scale of gender inequality and discrimination against women.
The
United Nations defines
violence against women as "any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual, or mental harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life."
Intimate partner violence refers to behaviour by an intimate partner or ex-partner that causes physical, sexual or psychological harm, including physical aggression, sexual coercion, psychological abuse and controlling behaviours.
Sexual violence is "any sexual act, attempt to obtain a sexual act, or other act directed against a person’s sexuality using coercion, by any person regardless of their relationship to the victim, in any setting. It includes rape, defined as the physically forced or otherwise coerced penetration of the vulva or anus with a penis, other body part or object."
Impact
Violence against women is a global problem of pandemic proportions. It causes devastating, harm to women’s lives and that of their children. It also hurts the economic and social health of their families, communities, and countries.
While some women are more at risk than others, violence can happen to any woman, in any country – regardless of culture, religion or economic status. Gender inequality including harmful gender norms are key drivers of violence against women.
Violence can negatively affect women’s physical, mental, sexual, and reproductive health. It is associated with increased risk of injuries, depression, anxiety disorders, unplanned pregnancies, sexually transmitted infections,  HIV and many other health problems .
Children who grow up in families where there is violence may suffer a range of behavioural and emotional disturbances. These can lead to mental and development problems and also be associated with perpetrating or experiencing violence later in life.
WHO response
WHO plays a key role in bringing attention to and responding to violence
against women as a public health and gender equality issue through:
Research and evidence-building to highlight the magnitude of violence against women, its risk factors and consequences, and to identify effective interventions for prevention and response.
Developing guidelines and tools, setting norms and standards for an effective health response to violence against women.
Strengthening country capacity of health systems and providers to prevent and respond to violence against women.
Encouraging leadership in health systems and building political will to address violence against women through advocacy and partnerships.
The
WHO 13
th
General Programme of Work
(GPW) includes violence against women as part of its contribution to Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5 on gender equality and women’s empowerment (specifically, SDG 5.2 on the elimination of violence against women and girls).
At the World Health Assembly in May 2016, Member States endorsed a
global plan of action
on strengthening the role of the health systems in addressing interpersonal violence, in particular against women and girls and against children.
Fact sheets
Violence against women
Questions and answers
Violence against women during COVID-19
Databases and tools
Violence Against Women Estimates (Intimate Partner Violence and Non-Partner Sexual Violence)
Policy database
Technical work
Violence against women and girls
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
News
All →
19 November 2025
News release
Lifetime toll: 840 million women faced partner or sexual violence
16 May 2025
Departmental update
Marking 30 years of progress – engaging the health sector to tackle violence against women and girls
6 March 2025
Departmental update
Building a healthier world by women and for women is key to achieving gender equality
19 December 2024
Departmental update
Membership of the Guideline Development Group for update of guidelines on responding to violence against women
Latest publications
All →
19 November 2025
Violence against women prevalence estimates, 2023
Violence against women and girls is a human rights violation and public health problem that transcends economic, social and national boundaries. It has...
Download
Read More
19 November 2025
RESPECT women: preventing violence against women, 2nd ed.
Violence against women is a major public health problem rooted in gender inequality and is a gross violation of women’s human rights, affecting the...
Download
Read More
7 April 2025
Clinical management of rape and intimate partner violence in emergencies: a training curriculum for health...
The clinical management of rape and intimate partner violence in emergencies (CMRIPV) training curriculum is designed to equip health workers with the...
Download
Read More
5 April 2025
Caring for women subjected to violence: online facilitated training for health workers
This online facilitated training curriculum for health workers to respond to intimate partner violence and sexual violence is for settings where in-person...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
19 November 2025
The power of listening, the power of the LIVES approach
9 December 2024
Supporting survivors of gender-based violence during humanitarian emergencies
19 August 2024
Donors making a difference: protecting health on the frontlines of humanitarian crises
6 May 2024
Donors making a difference: CERF helps WHO deliver on its pledge for one billion more people better protected from health emergencies
Our work
Strengthening data on violence against women for action
Strengthening health sector response to gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies
Events
All →
International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women
16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence 2025
25 November – 10 December 2025
Film, science, action: ending violence against women
24 November 2025 18:30 – 20:00 CET
Webinar: Measuring violence against women with disabilities - progress and challenges
3 December 2024 14:00 – 15:00 CET
Infographics
All →
19 November 2025
Behind the screen is a girl. Improve her safety online.
19 November 2025
Getting help isn't easy. Identify violence. Provide support.
19 November 2025
Not every bruise is visible. Support the emotional well-being of survivors.
Infographic
There is no excuse for violence. Support survivors to access services
Videos
All →
28 November 2024
WHO press conference on global health issues – 28 November 2024
11 November 2024
WHO’s work on health response to gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies
26 March 2024
Ending violence against women with disability: Nicole Lee's story
4 December 2023
16 Days of Activism to End Violence: Mama Rose's story
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Adolescent health
Human behaviour
Female genital mutilation
Socio-political determinants
Gender and health