Coronavirus
Skip to main content
There is a current outbreak of Coronavirus (COVID-19) disease
Find out more
→
Overview
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Most people infected with the virus will experience mild to moderate respiratory illness and recover without requiring special treatment. However, some will become seriously ill and require medical attention. Older people and those with underlying medical conditions like cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, or cancer are more likely to develop serious illness. Anyone can get sick with COVID-19 and become seriously ill or die at any age.
The best way to prevent and slow down transmission is to be well informed about the disease and how the virus spreads. Protect yourself and others from infection by staying at least 1 metre apart from others, wearing a properly fitted mask, and washing your hands or using an alcohol-based rub frequently. Get vaccinated when it’s your turn and follow local guidance.
The virus can spread from an infected person’s mouth or nose in small liquid particles when they cough, sneeze, speak, sing or breathe. These particles range from larger respiratory droplets to smaller aerosols. It is important to practice respiratory etiquette, for example by coughing into a flexed elbow, and to stay home and self-isolate until you recover if you feel unwell.
Stay informed:
Advice for the public
Myth busters
Questions and answers
Situation reports
All information on the COVID-19 outbreak
Prevention
To prevent infection and to slow transmission of COVID-19, do the following:
Get vaccinated when a vaccine is available to you.
Stay at least 1 metre apart from others, even if they don’t appear to be sick.
Wear a properly fitted mask when physical distancing is not possible or when in poorly ventilated settings.
Choose open, well-ventilated spaces over closed ones. Open a window if indoors.
Wash your hands regularly with soap and water or clean them with alcohol-based hand rub.
Cover your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing.
If you feel unwell, stay home and self-isolate until you recover.
Symptoms
COVID-19 affects different people in different ways. Most infected people will develop mild to moderate illness and recover without hospitalization.
Most common symptoms:
fever
cough
tiredness
loss of taste or smell.
Less common symptoms:
sore throat
headache
aches and pains
diarrhoea
a rash on skin, or discolouration of fingers or toes
red or irritated eyes.
Serious symptoms:
difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
loss of speech or mobility, or confusion
chest pain.
Seek immediate medical attention if you have serious symptoms.  Always call before visiting your doctor or health facility.
People with mild symptoms who are otherwise healthy should manage their symptoms at home.
On average it takes 5–6 days from when someone is infected with the virus for symptoms to show, however it can take up to 14 days.
Fact sheets
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
Post COVID-19 condition (long COVID)
Questions and answers
Q&As on COVID-19 and related health topics
Databases and tools
WHO Coronavirus (COVID-19) Dashboard
COVID-19 Clinical Care Pathway
COVID-19 Impact on nutrition analytical framework
COVID-19 Vaccine delivery toolkit
Global Clinical Platform for COVID-19
Emergency situations
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
Initiatives and groups
Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator
COVID-19 Technology access pool
ACT-Accelerator Ethics & Governance Working Group
Advisory Group on Therapeutics Prioritization for COVID-19
COVID-19 IHR Emergency Committee
COVID-19 Infection Prevention and Control Guidance Development Group
Facilitation Council for the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator
International Travel and Health (ITH) guideline development group (GDG) for COVID-19
Technical Advisory Group on the COVID-19 Technology Access Pool
Technical Advisory Group on COVID-19 Vaccine Composition
Technical Advisory Group on SARS-CoV-2 Virus Evolution
Working Group on Ethics and COVID-19
Training
COVID-19 Training
News
All →
13 October 2025
News release
WHO upgrades its public health intelligence system to boost global health security
29 September 2025
Statement
Types of data requested to inform December 2025 COVID-19 vaccine antigen composition deliberations
30 July 2025
Departmental update
Paying tribute to David Nabarro
27 June 2025
News release
WHO Scientific advisory group issues report on origins of COVID-19
Publications
All →
29 September 2025
Therapeutics and COVID-19: living guideline, August 2025
The WHO Therapeutics and COVID-19: living guideline contains recommendations for the use of therapeutics in the treatment of COVID-19. It is...
Download
Read More
24 September 2025
Tailoring event-based surveillance using open sources: practical guide for mass gatherings
Public health intelligence (PHI) is key to early warning alert and response (EWAR), and is vital in protecting the health of the populations in the context...
Download
Read More
21 August 2025
Risk communication and community engagement readiness and response toolkit: mass gatherings
This toolkit contains a comprehensive set of practical tools and resources designed to support country-level risk communication and community engagement...
Download
Read More
7 August 2025
Defining access to countermeasures: landscape report 2024
This landscape report on the current status of activities related to
medical countermeasures (MCMs) for pandemic response underscores the
urgent need...
Download
Read More
WHO documents
All →
16 September 2025
COVID-19 Global Risk Assessment
WHO regularly conducts risk assessments for graded emergencies in accordance with the WHO Emergency Response Framework. Since January 2020, WHO conducted...
Download
Read More
5 August 2025
Manual for strengthening monitoring of respiratory virus immunization coverage - draft
The Manual for strengthening monitoring of respiratory virus immunization coverage provides technical guidance to support immunization programmes...
Download
Read More
25 July 2025
Strategic and operational plan for coronavirus disease threat management
The WHO strategic and operational plan for coronavirus disease threat management sets out the global framework for supporting Member States in the sustained,...
Download
Read More
22 July 2025
COVID-19 Vaccination Insights Report
A standard analytic report presenting basic summary analyses of COVID-19      vaccine implementation data, including uptake and national vaccination  ...
Download
Read More
Our work
Tracking SARS-CoV-2 variants
Promoting a fair and equitable response to the COVID-19 pandemic
Promoting the health of refugees and migrants during COVID-19 pandemic
Preparing and preventing epidemics and pandemics
Feature stories
All →
4 September 2025
What's in a vaccine?
28 March 2025
Donors making a difference to maternal health & newborn health: the urgent drive to save women’s lives across the world
Infographics
Infographic
Diagnostic testing for SARS-CoV-2 infection
Infographic
Why testing is important?
Videos
20 October 2023
Pandemic preparedness: Introducing WHO's Investigations and Studies (Unity Studies) approach
5 June 2023
Nurses Facing COVID - 2023 Health Emergencies "GRAND PRIX" at the 4th Health for All Film Festival
14 October 2022
WHO's Science in 5: Older adults and COVID-19 vaccines - 14 October 2022
3 June 2022
WHO’s Science in 5 on COVID-19: Genome Sequencing
Events
Post COVID-19 condition: Science, Research and Policy
20 November 2024 16:00 – 17:00 CET
Webinar program on mental health and post COVID-19 condition
24 – 26 July 2024
Related links
COVID-19 vaccines
Vaccines explained series