Dengue and severe dengue
Skip to main content
Overview
Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral infection common in warm, tropical climates. It is caused by any one of four closely related dengue viruses (called serotypes), which can lead to a broad spectrum of symptoms, including some that are extremely mild (unnoticeable) to those who may require medical intervention and hospitalization. In severe cases, fatalities can occur. There is no treatment for the infection itself, but the symptoms that a patient experiences can be managed.
In 2023, WHO graded dengue as a Grade 3 emergency after outbreaks increased in several countries. Dengue epidemics tend to have seasonal patterns, with transmission often peaking
during and after rainy seasons
.
Several factors contribute to this increase, including high mosquito population levels, susceptibility to circulating serotypes, favourable
air temperatures
,
precipitation and humidity, all of which affect the reproduction and feeding patterns of mosquito populations, as well as the dengue virus incubation period. Unplanned urbanization and climatic factors such as heat waves and high temperatures have increased the intensity, frequency, duration and distribution of dengue in recent years. Lack of sustained surveillance and control interventions as well as staff are some of the other challenges. Absence of an integrated programmatic approach continues to affect countries.
Symptoms
Dengue is a self-limiting febrile illness with symptoms ranging from extremely mild (asymptomatic) to severe. Symptoms of dengue may be observed around 4–10 days after the bite of an infected mosquito. Common symptoms are like those of the flu, with patients experiencing:
fever,
headaches,
pain behind the eyes,
muscle and joint pain,
nausea/vomiting,
rash and
fatigue.
As the disease progresses, patients can also experience respiratory distress, bleeding from the nose and gums and rapid drop in blood pressure leading to shock. If left unmanaged, this can lead to death. Sound case management of dengue in hospitals has helped to reduce case-fatality rates to less than 1% in most affected countries.
Dengue is increasing at a faster rate than any other communicable disease, with a significant increase over 24 years (2000–2024). Annual dengue incidence is estimated to be in the order of 100 million symptomatic cases a year, with another ~300 million asymptomatic infections. The greatest burden is seen in Asia (75%), followed by Latin America and Africa. 2024 recorded the highest levels of dengue with 14 305 764 cases and 10 576 deaths reported from 112 countries to WHO. WHO has established a global dengue surveillance dashboard to track cases from all regions. (
https://worldhealthorg.shinyapps.io/dengue_global/
)
Treatment
There are no specific antiviral treatments against dengue fever. Acetaminophen (Paracetamol) is indicated to bring down the fever. Acetylsalicylic acid (Aspirin) and related non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (such as Ibuprofen) should be avoided.
Recovery from infection by one dengue virus provides lifelong immunity against that particular virus serotype. However, this immunity confers only partial and transient protection against subsequent infection by the other three serotypes of the virus. Evidence suggests that sequential infection increases the risk of developing severe dengue. The time interval between infections and the particular viral sequence of infections may also be of importance.
Currently, only one vaccine is available for dengue prevention. WHO recommends the use of Q-denga (TAK-003) in children aged 6–16 years in settings with high intensity of dengue transmission. The vaccination course consists of two injections given 3 months apart
The best way to prevent infection is to avoid being bitten by mosquitoes during the daytime. Mosquitoes that transmit dengue virus often live in and around the home and in the garden. People should:
wear clothing that covers the body well      (especially the legs and feet);
keep mosquitoes out of the house by      placing insect screens over doors and windows;
apply insect repellents according to the      manufacturer’s label instructions;
sleep under a net, during the day;
take extra precautions to prevent      transmission if a family member is infected by avoiding mosquito bites;      and
clean the surroundings and prevent water      stagnation in and around homes.
Fact sheets
Dengue
Questions and answers
Frequently asked questions on dengue and severe dengue
Databases and tools
NTD roadmap tracker
Global dengue surveillance dashboard
Disease outbreak news
Disease outbreak news
Initiatives and groups
Vector Control Advisory Group
Resolutions and decisions
Dengue fever and dengue haemorrhagic fever prevention and control;2002 | WHA55.17
Prevención y control de la fiebre dengue y la fiebre hemorrágica dengue;2002 | WHA55.17
Technical work
Control of Neglected tropical Diseases
News
All →
10 July 2025
Departmental update
New WHO guidelines for clinical management of arboviral diseases: dengue, chikungunya, Zika and yellow fever
22 May 2025
Departmental update
Dengue Expert Review Panel for Diagnostics
DONs
All →
Disease Outbreak News
Dengue - Iran (Islamic Republic of)
22 July 2024 |
Dengue - Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Disease Outbreak News
Dengue - Global situation
30 May 2024 |
Dengue - Global situation
Disease Outbreak News
Dengue - Global situation
21 December 2023 |
Dengue - Global situation
Science in 5
Episode #115 - Dengue Fever
27 March 2024 | video (webinar).
Why is Dengue fever spreading to places it did not exist before? What are the symptoms and treatments? What about vaccines? Dr Raman Velayudhan explains in Science in 5.
Our work
Improving data for dengue
Enhancing dengue diagnosis and case management
Engaging communities to sustain dengue vector control
Promoting dengue vector surveillance and control
Latest publications
All →
27 October 2025
Dengue case management for primary health care and home-based care: Booklet for health professionals...
The Dengue Case Management for Primary Health Care and Home-Based Care booklet, developed by the WHO South-East Asia Regional Office, is a comprehensive...
Download
Read More
16 July 2025
Policy considerations for strengthening preparedness and response to arbovirus epidemics and pandemics
The increasing incidence of arboviral outbreaks, such as dengue, chikungunya, and Zika, highlights the need for urgent and stronger preparedness and response...
Download
Read More
4 July 2025
WHO guidelines for clinical management of arboviral diseases: dengue, chikungunya, Zika and yellow fever
World Health Organization (WHO) has just released the Integrated Guidelines on the Clinical Management of Arboviral Diseases — a crucial step...
Download
Read More
28 April 2025
Laboratory testing for dengue virus: interim guidance, April 2025
Dengue is a growing global public health concern, with incidence rising significantly over the past two decades and cases doubling annually since 2021....
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
24 May 2024
Dengue information for travelers
In light of recent outbreaks of dengue virus infection and ongoing transmission in multiple regions where Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes...
Download
Read More
WHO Academy Course
Self-learning course: Clinical diagnosis and management of dengue
Feature story
Dengue outbreak and response in Bangladesh
Facts in pictures
29 September 2019
Dengue and severe dengue
Multimedia
All →
Infographic
Dengue and severe dengue
Related links
Integrated Vector Management
Vector Control Advisory Group
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr Raman Velayudhan
Scientist
velayudhanr@who.int
Other arbo-viral diseases
14 April 2025
Chikungunya
6 August 2024
Japanese encephalitis
20 October 2025
Yellow fever