Plague
Skip to main content
Overview
Plague is an infectious disease caused by
Yersinia pestis
bacteria, usually found in small mammals and their fleas. The disease is transmitted between animals via their fleas and, as it is a zoonotic bacterium, it can also transmit from animals to humans.
Humans can be contaminated by the bite of infected fleas, through direct contact with infected materials, or by inhalation. Plague can be a very severe disease in people, particularly in its septicaemic and pneumonic forms, with a case-fatality ratio
of 30% - 100% if left untreated.
Although plague has been responsible for widespread pandemics throughout history, including the so-called Black Death that caused over 50 million deaths in Europe during the fourteenth century, today it can be easily treated with antibiotics and the use of standard preventative measures.
Plague is found on all continents except Oceania but most human cases since the 1990s have occurred in Africa. Democratic Republic of Congo, Madagascar and Peru are the three most endemic countries.
Symptoms
People infected with plague usually develop influenza-like symptoms after an incubation period of 3–7 days. Symptoms include fever, chills, aches, weakness, vomiting and nausea.
There are 3 main forms of plague.
Bubonic plague is the most common and is caused by the bite of an infected flea. The plague bacillus,
Y. pestis
, enters at the bite and travels to the nearest lymph node to replicate. The lymph node becomes inflamed, tense and painful, and is called a bubo. With advanced infections, the inflamed lymph nodes can turn into suppurating open sores. Bubonic plague cannot be transmitted from human to human.
Septicaemic plague occurs when infection spreads through the bloodstream. It may result from flea bites or from direct contact with infective materials through cracks in the skin. Advanced stages of the bubonic form of plague will also lead to direct spread of
Y. pestis
in the blood.
Pneumonic plague – or lung-based plague – is the most virulent and least common form of plague. Typically, it is caused by spread to the lungs from advanced bubonic plague. However, a person with secondary pneumonic plague may form aerosolized infective droplets and transmit plague to other humans. This is usually fatal.
Treatment
Untreated plague can be rapidly fatal, so early diagnosis and treatment is essential for survival and to reduce complications. Antibiotics and supportive therapy are effective against plague if patients are diagnosed in time.
Laboratory testing is required to confirm infection. This includes identifying the causative bacteria in a sample of pus from a bubo, blood or sputum. WHO does not recommend vaccination except for high-risk people such as laboratory personnel and health
care workers.
Preventive measures include informing people when zoonotic plague is present in their environment and giving advice on how they can protect themselves. They should be advised to take precautions against flea bites and not to handle animal carcasses. People,
especially health workers, should also avoid direct contact with infected tissues such as buboes, or close exposure to patients with pneumonic plague.
Country readiness checklist
(in English)
Country readiness checklist
(in French)
Country readiness checklist
(in Portuguese)
Fact sheets
Plague
Questions and answers
Questions and answers on plague
Databases and tools
Plague Outbreak Toolbox
Emergency situations
Plague in Madagascar 2017
Disease outbreak news
Latest disease outbreak news
Weekly epidemiological record (WER)
Initiatives and groups
Emerging and Dangerous Pathogens Laboratory Network (EDPLN)
Training
Introduction to human plague
Technical work
Disease outbreaks
Risk communications and community engagement (RCCE)
News
All →
8 January 2018
News release
WHO Director-General: invest in health to end plague in Madagascar
27 November 2017
News release
Madagascar’s plague epidemic is slowing, but we must sustain the response
18 October 2017
News release
Suspected cases from Seychelles test negative for plague
6 October 2017
News release
WHO provides 1.2 million antibiotics to fight plague in Madagascar
Latest publications
All 	→
25 September 2024
Manual for plague surveillance, diagnosis, prevention and control
Plague has caused millions of deaths in pandemics over the past 2,500
years. Re-emerging in several countries during the 1990s, it is now
considered...
Download
Read More
27 May 2021
WHO guidelines for plague management: revised recommendations for the use of rapid diagnostic tests,...
Plague is an acute bacterial infection caused by Yersinia pestis. Although effective antimicrobials are available, plague still has high mortality because...
Download
Read More
14 May 2021
After action review (‎AAR)‎ results: plague response in Madagascar helped improve national preparedness...
Download
Read More
14 May 2021
Report of an Interregional Meeting on Prevention and Control of Plague, New Delhi, India, 13-16 March...
Download
Read More
Our work
Strengthening global health security at the human-animal interface
Strengthening national emergency preparedness
Streamlining operational R&D response during outbreaks
Developing norms and standards in the epidemic context
Feature stories
All →
14 November 2017
Madagascar plague: mitigating the risk of regional spread
7 November 2017
Encounters with plague: tracing and preventing illness
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Facts about plague
Infographic
Global distribution of natural plague
Events
All →
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: plague in the 21st century: new evidence to control a re-emerging zoonotic disease
23 July 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
Global consultation on Plague Vaccines
12 October 2023 13:00 – 18:00 CET
EPI-WIN webinar: Managing plague in the field
19 April 2023 13:00 – 14:00 CET
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Ebola virus disease
Diseases and conditions
Influenza (avian and other zoonotic)
Socio-political determinants
International Health Regulations
Communicable diseases
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)
Diseases and conditions
Zika virus disease