Nipah virus infection
Skip to main content
Overview
Nipah virus infection is a
zoonotic illness that is transmitted to people from animals, and can also be
transmitted through contaminated food or directly from person-to-person. In
infected people, it causes a range of illnesses from asymptomatic (subclinical)
infection to acute respiratory illness and fatal encephalitis. The virus can
also cause severe disease in animals such as pigs, resulting in significant
economic losses for farmers.
Although Nipah virus has
caused only a few known outbreaks in Asia, it infects a wide range of animals
and causes severe disease and death in people.
During the first
recognized outbreak in Malaysia, which also affected Singapore, most human
infections resulted from direct contact with sick pigs or their contaminated
tissues. Transmission is thought to have occurred via unprotected exposure to
secretions from the pigs, or unprotected contact with the tissue of a sick
animal.
In subsequent outbreaks in Bangladesh and India, consumption of fruits or fruit
products (such as raw date palm juice) contaminated with urine or saliva from
infected fruit bats was the most likely source of infection.
Human-to-human
transmission of Nipah virus has also been reported among family and care givers
of infected patients.
Symptoms
Human infections range from asymptomatic infection to acute respiratory infection, seizures and fatal encephalitis. Infected people initially develop symptoms that include fever, headaches, myalgia, vomiting and sore throat. This can be followed by dizziness, drowsiness, altered consciousness, and neurological signs that indicate acute encephalitis. Some people can also experience atypical pneumonia and severe respiratory problems, including acute respiratory distress. Encephalitis and seizures occur in severe cases, progressing to coma within 24 to 48 hours.
The incubation period is from 4 to 14 days but an incubation period as long  as 45 days has been reported.
Most people make a full recovery, although some are left with residual neurological conditions after acute encephalitis. Some cases of relapse have been reported.
The case fatality rate of Nipah virus infection is estimated at 40–75% but can vary by outbreak depending on surveillance and clinical management in affected areas.
Treatment
There are currently no drugs or vaccines that specifically target Nipah virus infection. WHO has identified Nipah as a priority disease for the
WHO Research and Development Blueprint.
Intensive supportive care is recommended to treat severe respiratory and neurologic complications.
Fact sheets
Nipah virus
Disease outbreak news
Latest outbreak news
Training
Introduction to Nipah virus disease
Technical work
R&D Blueprint
R&D Blueprint Nipah Virus
Global Alert and Response (GAR)
Risk communications and community engagement (RCCE)
News
All →
30 July 2018
Departmental update
Effective containment of the Nipah virus outbreak in India highlights the importance of a strong health system
Latest publications
All →
27 February 2024
Technical Brief: Enhancing readiness for a Nipah virus event in countries not reporting a Nipah virus...
Nipah virus infection is an emerging serious zoonotic disease transmitted to humans through infected animals (such as fruit bats of the Pteropodidae family...
Download
Read More
31 October 2023
WHO South-East Asia Regional Strategy for the prevention and control of Nipah virus infection 2023–2030
The Regional publication  “WHO South-east Asia Regional Strategy for the prevention and control of Nipah virus infection, 2023-2030  provides...
Download
Read More
22 April 2016
Nipah virus
Download
Read More
15 June 2012
Nipah virus outbreaks in Bangladesh: a deadly infectious disease
During 2001-2011, multidisciplinary teams from the Institute of Epidemiology,
Disease Control and Research (IEDCR) and International Centre for Diarrhoeal...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
8 August 2024
Paramyxoviridae - Landscape of vaccines and therapeutics licensed or under development for pathogens...
This document provides a list of Paramyxovirus vaccines and therapeutics licensed or under development for pathogens being considered as PRIORITY PATHOGENS.
Download
Read More
10 January 2019
Nipah Research and Development (R&D) Roadmap
R&D roadmaps are key documents to better understand current and future health threats and identify effective health technologies to save lives.With...
Download
Read More
27 August 2018
Nipah baseline situation analysis
DRAFT document on Nipah baseline analysis
Download
Read More
20 April 2018
Nipah Research and Development (R&D) Roadmap comment form
Please provide comments on the draft target product profile (TPP) using the comment form.
Download
Read More
Our work
Tracking SARS-CoV-2 variants
WHO Foresight: Monitoring emerging technologies and building futures-thinking
Rapidly detecting and responding to health emergencies
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Geographic distribution of Henipavirus outbreaks and fruit bats of Pteropodidae Family
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Hendra virus infection
Communicable diseases
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
Related links
Nipah in animals from the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE)