Disability
Skip to main content
Overview
Disability is part of being human. An estimated 1.3 billion people – about 16% of the global population – currently experience significant disability. This number is increasing due in part to population ageing and an increase in the prevalence of noncommunicable diseases.
Disability results from the interaction between individuals with a health condition, such as cerebral palsy, Down syndrome and depression, with personal and environmental factors including negative attitudes, inaccessible transportation and public buildings, and limited social support.
A person’s environment has a huge effect on the experience and extent of disability. Inaccessible environments create barriers that often hinder the full and effective participation of persons with disabilities in society on an equal basis with others. Progress on improving social participation can be made by addressing these barriers and facilitating persons with disabilities in their day to day lives.
For more information, see the
Global report on health equity for persons with disabilities
.
Health inequity
An estimated 1.3 billion people – or 1 in 6 people worldwide – experience significant disability.
Persons with disabilities die earlier, have poorer health, and experience more limitations in everyday functioning than the rest of the population due to health inequities.
These health inequities arise from unfair conditions that affect persons
with disabilities disproportionally, including stigma, discrimination, poverty, exclusion from education and employment, and barriers faced in the health system itself.
Compared to persons without disabilities, some persons with disabilities:
die up to 20 years earlier;
have more than a double risk of developing comorbid conditions such as depression, asthma, diabetes, stroke, obesity or poor oral health;
find inaccessible health facilities up to 6 times more hindering; and,
are up to 15 times more limited by inaccessible and unaffordable transportation.
It is a state obligation, through the health sector in coordination with other sectors, to address existing health inequities so that persons with disabilities can enjoy their inherent right to the highest attainable standard of health. Disability inclusion is critical to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and global health priorities of universal health coverage, protection in health emergencies and healthier populations.
Acting to achieve health equity for persons with disabilities is acting to achieve Health for All.
WHO response
WHO works to fully integrate and promote disability inclusion in the health sector. It works to ensure persons with disabilities:
have equitable access to effective health services;
are included in health emergencies preparedness and responses; and
can access cross-sectorial public health interventions to achieve the highest      attainable standard of health.
As requested in the World Assembly Resolution 74.8, WHO will launch the Global Report on Health Equity for Persons with Disabilities on 2 December 2022, which provides Member States and development partners with updated evidence, analysis and recommendations on disability inclusion in the health sector. Also requested in the resolution, WHO is developing technical guidance to support Member States to take action to realize the highest attainable standard of health for persons with disabilities.  This guidance will be in the form of a national strategic planning toolkit, the Disability Inclusion in the Health Sector Guide for Action.  It will provide practical guidance on how to develop a comprehensive plan to advance health equity for persons with disabilities through integration into health systems governance and planning.
WHO strives to be an inclusive organization, providing an enabling environment in which persons with disabilities fully and effectively participate on an equal basis with others, and that disability is systematically integrated in all work of the Organization, as it advances its mission to promote health, keep the world safe and serve the most vulnerable. In December 2020, WHO has launched its
policy on disability
and an action plan for its implementation. These documents serve as the agenda for implementing the
United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy
across WHO, which will ensure disability inclusion is consistently and systematically integrated into all aspects of WHO’s operational and programmatic work.
Fact sheets
Disability
Databases and tools
Strengthening the collection of data on disability
WHO Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS)
Model Disability Survey
Initiatives and groups
Disability Health Equity Initiative
Resolutions and decisions
WHA74.8: The highest attainable standard of health
for persons with disabilities
WHA66.9: Disability
WHA58.23: Disability, including prevention, management and rehabilitation
Technical work
Noncommunicable diseases, rehabilitation and disability
Sensory functions, disability and rehabilitation
Our work
Making accessible telehealth services for persons with disabilities
Supporting countries to advance health equity for persons with disabilities
Strengthening the collection of data on disability
Implementing the UN Disability Inclusion Strategy
Strengthening disability inclusion through collaboration
News
All →
29 August 2025
Departmental update
From Gaza to Geneva: WHO Director-General hosts Palestinian disability delegation
27 June 2025
Departmental update
Partners unite to launch WHO Disability Health Equity
7 May 2025
Departmental update
Global Disability Summit marks pivotal moment in advancing health for all
2 May 2025
Departmental update
OpenTeleRehab: a success story of inclusive telerehabilitation
Highlight
Global report on health equity for persons with disabilities
Documents
All →
25 February 2025
What countries can do to make health systems better for people with disabilities
This is the EasyRead version of a toolkit that helps governments to make health systems fairer for people with disabilities. WHO wrote this guide for action...
Download
Read More
Latest publications
All 	→
20 July 2025
Rapid diagnostic test accessibility considerations for professional use and self-tests
In the last few decades, rapid diagnostic medical tests, such as those for HIV, or SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19), have become widespread in laboratories, clinics,...
Download
Read More
14 January 2025
Health equity for persons with disabilities: guide for action: executive summary
The Health equity for persons with disabilities: guide for action (or Disability inclusion guide for action) provides practical guidance...
Download
Read More
7 November 2024
Health equity for persons with disabilities: guide for action
The Health equity for persons with disabilities: guide for action (or Disability inclusion guide for action) provides practical guidance on the process...
Download
Read More
9 September 2024
Implementation toolkit for accessible telehealth services
The Implementation toolkit for accessible telehealth services provides practical guidance to support governments, industry partners, health service providers...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
16 August 2024
Designing Disability-Inclusive Health Systems
15 March 2024
Montenegro, the first country in the European Region to implement the WHO Disability guide for action
27 February 2023
Supporting parents of children with cerebral palsy in Viet Nam
2 December 2022
Speaking out on the stigma of mental health
Videos
All →
23 April 2025
Dr Tedros’ remarks at the Global Disability Summit 2025
7 April 2025
Pregnancy and disability: Yenifer’s story from Honduras
3 December 2024
International Day of Persons with Disabilities 2024
26 March 2024
Ending violence against women with disability: Nicole Lee's story
Events
All →
Inaugural meeting of the WHO Disability Health Equity Network
12 November 2025 09:00 – 10:30 CET
Launch of the WHO Rapid diagnostic test accessibility considerations
7 October 2025 14:00 – 15:00 CET
Towards health equity for persons with disabilities: the Disability Inclusion Guide for Action in AFRO
4 September 2025 11:30 – 13:00 CAT
Campaign
International Day of Persons with Disabilities
Fact file
7 March 2023
10 Facts on disability
Related health topics
Health interventions
Assistive technology
Conditions
Deafness and hearing loss
Diseases and conditions
Eye care, vision impairment and blindness
Health interventions
Rehabilitation