Financial protection
Skip to main content
Overview
Financial protection is at the core of universal health coverage (UHC) and is one of the final coverage goals of health financing policies. It is achieved when direct payments made to obtain health services do not expose people to financial hardship and do not threaten living standards. The key to protecting people is to ensure prepayment and pooling of resources for health rather than relying on people paying for health services out-of-pocket (OOP) at the time of use.
Catastrophic out-of-pocket health spending, defined as exceeding 10% of a household budget, continues to rise. More than one billion people, about 14% of the global population, experienced such large out-of-pocket payments relative to their budgets. But even small expenditures in absolute terms can be devastating for low-income families; approximately 1.3 billion individuals were pushed or further pushed into poverty by such payments, including 300 million people who were already living in extreme poverty. For more information, please see the reports
here
and visit the
UHC fact sheet.
Key policy messages
In-depth, context-specific analysis and evaluations of health financing policies are needed to understand the drivers of trends.
Financial protection is undermined by heavy reliance on out-of-pocket (OOP) health spending in all countries at all income levels. OOP health spending undermines efforts to eradicate poverty, which can be avoided by minimizing OOP health spending for people living close to poverty, and eliminating such payments for people living in poverty.
Financial protection is not guaranteed by participation in a health coverage scheme. There are different ways of financing health systems to ensure a population is financially protected, however, evidence shows that more significant prepaid, pooled, compulsory payments are needed.
Public health funding must increase further and be used more efficiently and equitably.  Different revenue sources must be pooled or their utilization better coordinated.  The size of compulsory prepaid funds must be sufficiently large; prepaid funds must be redistributed; and coverage for medicines must beextended.
OOP spending on health must be limited to low, fixed, and capped co-payments, and removed completely for the poor and most vulnerable. Removing financial barriers to care reduces forgone care, thereby improving service coverage and financial protection.
Fact sheets
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Primary health care
Questions and answers
Universal health coverage: tracking
Database and tools
UHC data portal: financial protection
World Health Survey+ Instrument - Household Questionnaire
Monitoring universal health coverage (UHC)
Global health expenditure database
Resolutions and decisions
EB154/28 - A77/16, Draft fourteenth general programme of work, 2025–2028, 2024
EB154/6 - Universal Health Coverage, 2023
UNGA 78/4 Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, 2023
EB152/28, Thirteenth General Programme of Work, 2019–2025, 2022
UNGA 74/2 Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, 2019
WHA 58.13 Sustainable health financing, universal health coverage and social health insurance, 2005
Technical work
Health Financing and Economics
Economic Evaluation and Analysis (EEA)
Latest publications
All →
16 December 2024
WHO delivering on its commitment to protect and improve people’s health: stories of healthier populations,...
This publication, grounded in the GPW 13 results framework, features qualitative
stories from the field that are integral to GPW 13 reporting. These...
Download
Read More
8 August 2024
Tracking inequalities in financial hardship due to out-of-pocket health spending by age structure of...
This brief first provides more conceptual details about how a life-course approach can be adapted to track inequalities in financial hardship due to out-of-pocket...
Download
Read More
12 January 2024
Health benefit packages analysis of AB-PMJAY SEHAT
This analysis provides recommendations for changes and rationalization of the health benefit package of the AB-PMJAY SEHAT scheme in Jammu & Kashmir...
Download
Read More
18 September 2023
Tracking Universal Health Coverage: 2023 Global monitoring report: Executive summary
The world is off track to make significant progress towards universal health coverage (UHC) (SDG target 3.8) by 2030 as improvements to health services...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Assessing country progress in health financing for UHC
Monitoring financial protection
Events
All →
18 September 2023 14:00 – 15:00 ET
Launch of Universal Health Coverage Global Monitoring Report 2023
Videos
All →
17 September 2023
2023 Universal Health Coverage Global Monitoring Report
12 December 2021
Tracking Universal Health Coverage
13 December 2017
Video: Universal health coverage
Related health topics
Health systems
Health accounts
Health systems
Health budget
Health systems
Health financing
Other
Universal health coverage