Food Safety
Skip to main content
Overview
Access to enough safe and nutritious food is key to sustaining life and promoting good health. Unsafe food containing harmful bacteria, viruses, parasites or chemical substances can cause more than 200 different diseases, ranging from diarrhoea to cancers.
Around the world, an estimated 600 million – almost 1 in 10 people – fall ill after eating contaminated food each year, resulting in 420 000 deaths and the loss of 33 million healthy life years (DALYs).
Food safety, nutrition and food security are closely linked. Unsafe food creates a vicious cycle of disease and malnutrition, particularly affecting infants, young children, elderly and the sick. In addition to contributing to food and nutrition security,
a safe food supply also supports national economies, trade and tourism, stimulating sustainable development. The globalization of food trade, a growing world population, climate change and rapidly changing food systems have an impact on the safety
of food. WHO aims to enhance the capacity to prevent, detect and respond to public health threats associated with unsafe food at the global and country levels.
Learn about Nutrition and Food Safety and COVID-19
Impact
Foodborne diseases impede socioeconomic development by straining health care systems and harming national economies, tourism and trade. The burden of foodborne diseases to public health and to economies has often been underestimated due to underreporting
and difficulty to establish causal relationships between food contamination and resulting illness or death. Children under 5 years of age carry 40% of the foodborne disease burden, with 125 000 deaths every year.
The consumption and production of safe food have immediate and long-term benefits for people, the planet and the economy. Safe food is essential to human health and well-being, only food that is safe can be traded. Safe food allows for the uptake of nutrients
and promotes long-term human development. When food is not safe, humans cannot develop, and the Sustainable Development Goals cannot be achieved.
The 2019 World Bank report on the economic burden of the foodborne diseases indicated that US$ 110 billion is lost each year in productivity and medical expenses resulting from unsafe food in low- and middle-income countries. Unsafe or contaminated food
leads to trade rejections, economic losses and food loss and waste, while safe food production improves economic opportunities by enabling market access and productivity.
WHO response
WHO calls for the transformation of food systems to make food safe, healthy and sustainably produced for all the world population.
WHO provides scientific advice and research to help develop international standards for food safety through the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)/WHO Codex Alimentarius.
WHO provides global leadership in facilitating investment and coordinated evidence-based action across multiple sectors. This supports Member States in building strong, sustainable and resilient national food control systems with a balance of responsibilities between the different stakeholders, including consumers. It does so through the implementation of WHO Global Strategy for Food Safety (2022–2030); monitoring the global burden of foodborne diseases and supporting countries in burden estimates; supporting stronger national food control systems by comprehensive assessments through the FAO/WHO food control system assessment tool; and helping implement adequate infrastructure to respond to food safety emergencies through the International Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN).
WHO promotes safe food handling through the
WHO Five keys to safer food
and advocates for priorities and policies that move food safety forward globally, by convening with partners and the public through World Food Safety Day and global Food Safety Community of Practice.
Fact sheets
Arsenic
Botulism
Campylobacter
Dioxins
E. coli
Food safety
Listeriosis
Natural toxins in food
Mycotoxins
Salmonella (non-typhoidal)
Question and answers
COVID-19: Questions relating to consumers
COVID-19: Questions relating to food businesses
COVID-19: Questions relating to food safety authorities
Genetically modified food
Food safety: Pesticide residue
One Health
Antimicrobial resistance in the food chain
Sale of live wild mammals in traditional food markets
Radioactivity in food after a nuclear emergency
Databases and tools
FOSCOLLAB
Global Environment Monitoring System (GEMS) / Food Contamination Monitoring and Assessment Programme
Food additives database (JECFA)
Chemical Safety Information from Intergovernmental Organizations (INCHEM)
The Global Health Observatory Data on foodborne diseases
Initiatives and groups
Ad hoc Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Risk Assessment of Food Allergens
FAO/WHO Codex Trust Fund
FAO/WHO International Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN)
Food Systems for Health
Guideline Development Group on optimal intake of animal-source foods
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA)
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Meetings on Microbiological Risk Assessment (JEMRA)
Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR)
Technical Advisory Group on Food Safety: Safer Food for Better Health
WHO Alliance for Food Safety
Resolutions and decisions
Strengthening efforts on food safety (WHA73.5)
Advancing food safety initiatives (WHA63.3)
UN General Assembly: World Food Safety Day (A/RES/73/3250)
Joint FAO/WHO Programme on Food Standards (Codex Alimentarius) WHA16.42
Antimicrobial resistance: summary report on progress made in implementing resolution WHA67.25 on antimicrobial resistance: report by the Secretariat
Technical work
Nutrition and Food Safety
News
All →
3 November 2025
Note for Media
48th session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission
28 July 2025
Joint News Release
Global hunger declines, but rises in Africa and western Asia: UN report
18 June 2025
Departmental update
FAO/WHO Indigenous Peoples’ questionnaire on pesticides officially launched
7 February 2025
Departmental update
Codex Alimentarius Commission: spotlight on side events at the forty-seventh session in Geneva
Our work
Assessing chemical risks in food
Estimating the burden of foodborne diseases
Promoting safe food handling
Strengthening national food control systems
Assessing microbiological risks in food
Monitoring progress towards global food safety targets
Strengthening foodborne disease surveillance
Campaign
World Food Safety Day - 7 June 2025
Events
All →
Forty-eighth session of the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission adopts new standards
10 – 14 November 2025
Ad hoc Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Risk Assessment of Food Allergens – reference dose(s) for cereals containing gluten or gluten
3 – 7 November 2025
Webinar: Innovations in foodborne disease surveillance and food contamination monitoring
28 October 2025 14:30 – 16:00 United Arab Emirates Time
Annual general meeting of the WHO Alliance for Food Safety
28 – 30 October 2025
Latest publications
All →
4 November 2025
Risk assessment of Listeria monocytogenes in foods: part 2: Risk assessment: meeting report
The 52nd Session of the Codex Committee on Food Hygiene (CCFH) requested the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Meeting on Microbiological Risk Assessment (JEMRA) to...
Download
Read More
28 September 2025
Report of the 11th Meeting of the WHO Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts for Maternal,...
This is the report from the 11th meeting (June 10- 12 2025) of the strategic and technical advisory group of experts (STAGE) for maternal newborn child...
Download
Read More
18 August 2025
Pesticide residues in food: report 2024: Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues
A Joint Meeting of the FAO Panel of Experts on Pesticide Residues in Food and the Environment and the WHO Core Assessment Group on Pesticide Residues (JMPR)...
Download
Read More
16 July 2025
International code of conduct on pesticide management: guidance on options for reducing risk when phasing...
This guidance covers different options for banning or phasing out a pesticide and suggests related risk reduction measures to be taken during the phase-out...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
21 October 2025
Spreadsheets for WHO reference protocol for measuring fatty acids in foods, with emphasis on monitoring...
This document was prepared in support of the publication "WHO reference protocol for measuring fatty acids in foods, with emphasis on monitoring trans-fatty...
Download
Read More
18 September 2025
Nutrition and Food Safety News - July-August 2025
This edition of the NFS Newsletter features key activities we undertook in July and August 2025.
Download
Read More
26 August 2025
Nutrition and Food Safety News - May-June 2025
This edition of the NFS Newsletter features key activities we undertook in May and June 2025.
Download
Read More
28 July 2025
The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2025
This report is the annual global monitoring report for Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 2 targets 2.1 and 2.2 – to end hunger, food insecurity...
Read More
Assessment tool
7 August 2019
Food control system assessment tool: dimension D: Science / Knowledge base and continuous improvement
Dimension D looks at the necessary features for the system to build its scientific soundness and to keep abreast of new scientific developments and innovations,...
Download
Read More
7 August 2019
Food control system assessment tool: dimension C: interactions with stakeholders
Dimension C identifies the interactions that must take place for the system to regularly adjust to national and international stakeholders’ evolving...
Download
Read More
7 August 2019
Food control system assessment tool: dimension B: control functions
Dimension B focuses on the processes and the outputs of the national food control system. It revolves around the control functions that must be exercised...
Download
Read More
7 August 2019
Food control system assessment tool: dimension A: inputs and resources ﻿
Dimension A aims at mapping the fundamental elements necessary for the system to operate. These range from legal and policy instruments to financial assets,...
Download
Read More
7 August 2019
Food control system assessment tool: introduction and glossary
National food control system plays a pivotal role in protecting the health of consumers and ensuring fair practices in food trade. When we are able...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Is a plant-based diet safer?
Infographic
Is standing water safe to drink?
Infographic
Are foods labelled as "organic" necessarily safe?
Infographic
Can I add lemon juice or vinegar to food to ensure it is safe to eat?
Videos
All →
12 August 2025
Food safety: turning information into action - Webinar by the WHO - 3 June 25
4 March 2025
World Food Safety Day 2025 – theme launch
13 November 2024
Food safety: Source attribution method in the foodborne diseases estimates – WHO webinar
1 July 2024
Ranking food safety risks at the national level – WHO’s webinar
Related health topics
Physical environment
Antimicrobial resistance
Diseases and conditions
Foodborne diseases
Human behaviour
Nutrition
Physical environment
Chemical safety
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
Disasters
Climate change
Diseases and conditions
Foodborne trematode infections