Oral health
Skip to main content
Overview
Oral health is the state of the mouth, teeth and orofacial structures that enables individuals to perform essential functions such as eating, breathing and speaking, and encompasses psychosocial dimensions such as self-confidence, well-being and the ability to socialize and work without pain, discomfort and embarrassment. Oral health varies over the life course from early life to old age, is integral to general health and supports individuals in participating in society and achieving their potential.
Oral diseases encompass a range of diseases and conditions that include dental caries, periodontal (gum) disease, tooth loss, oral cancer, oro-dental trauma, noma and birth defects such as cleft lip and palate. Oral diseases are among the most common noncommunicable diseases worldwide, affecting an estimated 3.5 billion people. While the global burden of oral health conditions is growing, particularly in low- and middle-income countries, the overall burden of oral health conditions on services is likely to keep increasing because of population growth and ageing.
Oral diseases disproportionately affect the most vulnerable and disadvantaged populations. People of low socioeconomic status carry a higher burden of oral diseases and this association remains across the life course, from early childhood to older age, and regardless of the country's overall income level.
Causes and symptoms
Most oral diseases and conditions share modifiable risk factors with the leading noncommunicable diseases (diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic respiratory diseases and mental disorders). These risk factors include tobacco use, alcohol consumption and unhealthy diets high in free sugars, all of which are increasing at the global level. There is a proven relationship between oral and general health. It is reported, for example, that diabetes is linked with the development and progression of periodontitis. Moreover, there is a causal link between high consumption of sugars and diabetes, obesity and dental caries.
When oral health is compromised by disease or injury, general health is also affected. The pain and discomfort associated with oral diseases make concentrating difficult, cause people to miss school or work, and can lead to social isolation. Oral diseases have a severe social and economic impact on individuals and families by increasing household expenditures and seriously affecting people’s quality of life and well-being.
WHO response
The WHO Oral Health Programme leads the work on setting the global
oral health policy agenda in close collaboration with member states and
other key stakeholders. Recent momentum has led to the development of
key policy documents to support countries in moving towards universal
health coverage for oral health by 2030. These include the
Global strategy on oral health
,
the
Global oral health action plan
and the
Global oral health status report
.
To support implementation of this ambitious policy agenda, the WHO Oral Health Programme supports countries by:
providing leadership and technical support to countries on oral health policy design and implementation;
monitoring disease burden, risk factors, health service use and other health trends related to oral health; and
reviewing current and emerging evidence including cost-effective analyses of oral health interventions to support the establishment of norms and standards.
The WHO Oral Health Programme contributes to other priority activities in countries such as:
supporting the phase down in the use of dental amalgam in the context of the Minamata Convention on mercury;
strengthening the oral health care system with a focus on integrating essential oral health care into primary health care and UHC benefit package;
supporting the implementation of public health interventions based on digital technologies; and
reinforcing integration of oral health into life-course programmes including the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing.
Fact sheets
Oral health
Sugars and dental caries
Noma
Candidiasis (yeast infection)
Databases and tools
The Global Health Observatory: Oral health data portal
Initiatives and groups
Oral health care and the environment
Resolutions and decisions
Global strategy on oral health (WHA75 (11))
Oral health (WHA 74.5)
Global Strategy on Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases (WHA 53)
Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health  (WHA 57)
Health Promotion and Healthy Lifestyles (WHA 57)
Cancer Prevention and Control (WHA 58)
International Plan of Action on Ageing (WHA 58)
Promotion of healthy lifestyles (WHA 58)
Technical work
Noncommunicable diseases, rehabilitation and disability
News
All →
26 June 2025
Departmental update
WHO’s work on oral health honoured with prestigious Aubrey Sheiham Award
25 November 2024
News release
The first-ever global oral health conference highlights universal health coverage by 2030
26 May 2024
Departmental update
WHO releases Global strategy and action plan on oral health
18 January 2024
Departmental update
Opinion: It's official, noma is a neglected tropical disease. Now what?
Latest publications
All →
10 July 2025
Sugars and dental caries: WHO technical note, May 2025
This WHO technical information note on sugars and dental caries highlights the impact of sugar consumption on the global burden of dental caries. Free...
Download
Read More
25 June 2025
Report of the WHO global oral health meeting, Bangkok, Thailand, 26-29 November 2024
The first-ever World Health Organization (WHO) Global Oral Health Meeting was convened in Bangkok, Thailand, from 26–29 November 2024. Hosted by...
Download
Read More
28 January 2025
Tracking progress on the implementation of the Global oral health action plan 2023–2030: baseline report
The aim of this report is to provide a comprehensive baseline assessment on the global oral health targets to track implementation progress of the Global...
Download
Read More
31 December 2024
Developing the global oral health monitoring framework report: a set of indicators towards universal...
The Global Oral Health Action Plan 2023–2030 includes a monitoring framework to track its implementation. Specifically, there are two overarching...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
31 January 2025
Bangkok Declaration – No Health Without Oral Health
In 2024, WHO convened the first-ever Global oral health meeting in Bangkok, Thailand, as part of the preparatory process for the 4th United Nations...
Download
Read More
11 January 2023
Draft Global Oral Health Action Plan (2023–2030)
In response to the resolution on oral health (WHA74.5), the WHO Secretariat has prepared a first draft WHO discussion paper containing a proposed draft...
Download
Read More
Feature story
29 January 2024
Surviving survival: the impact of noma
28 May 2022
Landmark global strategy on oral health adopted at World Health Assembly 75
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Almost half of the world’s population suffer from oral diseases
Infographic
Three quarters of those affected by oral diseases live in middle income countries
Infographic
Good oral health
Infographic
Prevent oral diseases
Videos
All →
27 June 2025
Oral health message by WHO Director-General: "There is No Health Without Oral Health"
27 June 2025
WHO Global Oral Health Meeting: On the Road to the 2025 UN High-level Meeting on NCDs and beyond
13 February 2025
Bridging oral health into the global health arena
16 December 2022
Promoting oral health as essential to healthy ageing
Events
All →
WHO global oral health meeting: Universal health coverage for oral health by 2030
26 – 29 November 2024
Launch of the IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention: Volume 19 Oral Cancer Prevention
29 November 2023 09:30 – 11:00 CET
Launch of the Global oral health status report
18 November 2022 14:00 – 15:30 CET
Consultation on the Global Oral Health Action Plan 2023–2030
12 August – 16 September 2022
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Ageing
Physical environment
Air pollution
Behavioural interventions
Health promoting schools
Behavioural interventions
Health promotion
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Human behaviour
Nutrition
Conditions
Obesity
Substances
Tobacco