Tsunamis
Skip to main content
Overview
Tsunamis are giant waves that are produced when a large volume of water is displaced in an ocean or large lake by an earthquake, volcanic eruption, underwater landslide or meteorite. Between 1998-2017, tsunamis caused more than 250 000 deaths globally, including more than 227 000 deaths due to the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004.
Tsunamis can travel thousands of kilometres with speeds up to 800 kilometres per hour. Once they reach the coast, they can have devastating impacts on the community. Successive crests can arrive at intervals of every 10 to 45 minutes and wreak destruction for several hours.
More than 700 million people live in low-lying coastal areas and Small Island Developing States exposed to extreme sea-level events including tsunamis.
Resilient infrastructure, early warning systems, and education is critical to saving people and protecting their assets against tsunami risk in the future.
Impact
Drowning is the most significant cause of death due to tsunamis. Injuries from debris account for many of the health care needs in the immediate aftermath of the disaster. Falling structures and waters full of swirling debris can inflict crush injuries, fractures, and a variety of open and closed wounds.
The risk of communicable diseases depends on the size, health status and living conditions of the population displaced by the tsunami. The population could be at risk of water-borne diseases and respiratory diseases due to crowding in temporary shelters and inadequate water and sanitation, as well as vaccine-preventable diseases if there is a low vaccination coverage rate prior to the disaster.
Survivors of tsunamis often also face short- and long-term mental health effects due to loss of family, property, livestock or crops. The immediate health concerns after the rescue of survivors following a natural disaster are drinking water, food, shelter and medical care for injuries.
WHO Response
The magnitude of the physical and human costs from tsunamis can be reduced if adequate emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery measures are implemented in a sustainable and timely manner.
WHO works with Member States to build resilient and proactive health systems that can anticipate the needs and challenges during emergencies so that they are more likely to reduce risks and respond effectively when needed.
As the health cluster lead for global emergencies, WHO works with partners to respond to:
ensure appropriate food supplementation;
restore primary care services, like immunization, child and maternal health, and mental health;
assemble mobile health teams and outreach;
conduct epidemic surveillance, early warning and response;
call for emergency funding to support health action.
Fact sheets
Drowning
Mental health in emergencies
Questions and answers
WHO's role in Humanitarian Health Action
What is WHO’s role in emergencies?
How do I protect myself in a flood?
Databases and tools
Disaster statistics - UNDRR
Disease outbreak news
Latest DONs
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 64.10 Strengthening national health emergency and disaster management capacities and resilience of health systems
Technical work
Health Emergencies Programme
WHO/WEDC Technical Notes on WASH in Emergencies
News
All →
1 March 2023
News release
Visit of WHO Director-General to north-west Syria
10 February 2023
News release
WHO sends health supplies to reach 400 000 people impacted by the earthquakes in Türkiye and the Syrian Arab Republic
14 August 2021
News release
PAHO deploys experts to support Haiti during earthquake aftermath
13 May 2015
News release
Emergency preparedness pays off as Kathmandu hospitals respond to earthquakes
Publications
All →
1 January 2018
Chemical releases associated with earthquakes
This leaflet provides brief information about Natech and other
chemical releases caused directly or indirectly by earthquakes.
It is an extract from...
Download
Read More
1 January 2015
Ten years after the tsunami of 2004: Impact action change future
On 26 December 2004, two extremely rare events occurred close to the southwestern shores of northern Indonesia. The first was a massive earthquake measuring...
Download
Read More
8 December 2013
Tsunami 2004: A comprehensive Analysis, Volume-1
One of the lessons learnt from emergencies or disasters in the South-East Asia Region is that information and knowledge management is a weak area. The...
Download
Read More
8 December 2013
Tsunami 2004: A comprehensive Analysis, Volume-2
One of the lessons learnt from emergencies or disasters in the South-East Asia Region is that information and knowledge management is a weak area. The...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Building a skilled workforce to prepare for and respond to emergencies
Strengthening national emergency preparedness
Rapidly detecting and responding to health emergencies
Managing environmental health risks in emergencies
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Health tips after floods
Infographic
Food safety tips for flooding
Training
Incident Management System (Tier 1)
WHO Incident Management System (Tier 2)
WHO Pre-Deployment Pack GO
Risk Communication Essentials
What to do before, during and after an earthquake
Related links
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 – 2030
WHO Health Cluster
Related health topics
Disasters
Floods
Disasters
Landslides
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)