Foodborne diseases
Skip to main content
Overview
Over 200 diseases are caused by eating food contaminated with bacteria, viruses, parasites or chemical substances such as heavy metals. This growing public health problem causes considerable socioeconomic impact though strains on health-care systems lost productivity, and harming tourism and trade. These diseases contribute
significantly to the global burden of disease and mortality.
Foodborne
diseases are caused by contamination of food and occur at any stage of the food production, delivery and consumption chain. They can result from several forms of environmental contamination including pollution in water, soil or air, as well as unsafe food storage and processing.
Foodborne
diseases encompass a wide range of illnesses from diarrhoea to cancers.
Most present as gastrointestinal issues, though they can also produce neurological, gynaecological and immunological symptoms. Diseases
causing diarrhoea are a major problem in all countries of the world,
though the burden is carried disproportionately by low- and
middle-income countries and by children under 5 years of age.
Impact
Every year, nearly one in 10
people around the world fall ill after eating contaminated food, leading to over 420 000 deaths. Children are disproportionately affected, with
125 000 deaths every year in people under 5 years of age. The majority of these cases are caused by diarrhoeal diseases. Other serious consequences of foodborne diseases include kidney and liver failure,
brain and neural disorders, reactive arthritis, cancer, and death.
Foodborne
diseases are closely linked to poverty in low- and middle-income
countries but are a growing public health issue around the world.
Increasing international trade and longer, more complex food chains increase the risk of food contamination and the transport of infected food products across national borders. Growing cities, climate change,
migration and growing international travel compound these issues and expose people to new hazards.
WHO Response
WHO works to assist Member States in building capacity to prevent,
detect and manage foodborne risks. Foodborne diseases are reflected in several
targets of Sustainable Developmental Goal 3 and are a priority area within the
Organization’s work. Activities include research and independent scientific
assessments of food-related hazards, foodborne disease awareness programs, and
helping to promote food safety through national health-care programs. The
WHO Five Keys to Safer
Food manual provides straightforward tips and guidelines on
how to produce, process, handle and consume food to limit spreading and
contracting foodborne illnesses.
In collaboration with the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization, WHO created the Codex Alimentarius, a nongovernmental interagency
organization tasked with creating food standards, guidelines, and codes of
practice that contributes to the safety, quality, and fairness of the
international food trade. The two agencies also developed the International
Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN) to rapidly share information during
food safety emergencies.
Fact sheets
Food safety
Salmonella (non-typhoidal)
Listeriosis
Diarrhoeal disease
E. coli
Campylobacter
Natural toxins in food
Arsenic
Mycotoxins
Botulism
Foodborne trematode infections
Hepatitis A
Taeniasis/cysticercosis
Echinococcosis
Questions and answers
COVID-19: Questions relating to consumers
COVID-19: Questions relating to food businesses
COVID-19: Questions relating to food safety authorities
One Health
Antimicrobial resistance in the food chain
Database and tools
The Global Health Observatory Data on foodborne diseases
Initiatives and groups
Foodborne Disease Burden Epidemiology Reference Group (FERG)
WHO Alliance for Food Safety
Resolutions and decisions
Strengthening efforts on food safety (WHA73.5)
Advancing food safety initiatives (WHA63.3)
UN General Assembly: World Food Safety Day (A/RES/73/250)
Technical work
Nutrition and Food Safety
News
All →
3 November 2025
Note for Media
48th session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission
28 July 2025
Joint News Release
Global hunger declines, but rises in Africa and western Asia: UN report
7 February 2025
Departmental update
Codex Alimentarius Commission: spotlight on side events at the forty-seventh session in Geneva
26 November 2024
Departmental update
Codex Alimentarius Commission calls for food standards that meet future needs
Our work
Assessing chemical risks in food
Estimating the burden of foodborne diseases
Strengthening foodborne disease surveillance
Strengthening nutrition surveillance
Assessing microbiological risks in food
Promoting safe food handling
Strengthening national food control systems
Event
All →
Forty-eighth session of the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission adopts new standards
10 – 14 November 2025
Ad hoc Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Risk Assessment of Food Allergens – reference dose(s) for cereals containing gluten or gluten
3 – 7 November 2025
Webinar: Innovations in foodborne disease surveillance and food contamination monitoring
28 October 2025 14:30 – 16:00 United Arab Emirates Time
Annual general meeting of the WHO Alliance for Food Safety
28 – 30 October 2025
Publication
All 	→
25 October 2024
Joint FAO/WHO expert consultation on the risks and benefits of fish consumption: meeting report, Rome,...
Evolving science and debate concerning the benefits and risks of consuming fish have resulted in confusion over the years, and national and international...
Download
Read More
23 October 2024
WHO Foodborne Disease Burden Epidemiology Reference Group for 2021–2024: second meeting report, 19 October-2...
This report describes the second meeting of the WHO Foodborne
Disease Burden Epidemiology Reference Group for 2021-2024.  This second
meeting...
Download
Read More
25 September 2024
FAO/WHO background document on the risks and benefits of fish consumption
The report of the first Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Risks and Benefits of Fish Consumption was published in 2010. Since then, new
literature,...
Download
Read More
30 January 2024
Fires: four tips to reduce food safety risks
Fires, explosions and volcanic eruptions can damage and contaminate food and water due to heat, smoke, fumes and chemicals. These flyers include tips to...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
All →
12 August 2025
Food safety: turning information into action - Webinar by the WHO - 3 June 25
Infographic
Components of a fully developed surveillance and response system for foodborne disease
Infographic
Foodborne diseases in the WHO Region of the Americas
Infographic
Foodborne diseases in the WHO Western Pacific Region
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Diarrhoea
Physical environment
Food safety
Diseases and conditions
Malnutrition
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
Q&A on foodborne diseases
Facts in pictures
22 February 2018
Food safety