Abortion - Global
Skip to main content
Overview
WHO defines health as a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity. Making health for all a reality, and moving towards the progressive realization of human rights, requires that all individuals have access to quality health care, including comprehensive abortion care services – which includes information, management of abortion, and post-abortion care. Lack of access to safe, timely, affordable and respectful abortion care poses a risk to not only the physical, but also the mental and social, well-being of women and girls.
Induced abortion is a simple and common health-care procedure. Each year, almost half of all pregnancies – 121 million – are unintended; 6 out of 10 unintended pregnancies and 3 out of 10 of all pregnancies end in induced abortion. Abortion is safe when carried out using a method recommended by WHO, appropriate to the pregnancy duration and by someone with the necessary skills. However, when women with unwanted pregnancies face barriers to obtaining quality abortion, they often resort to unsafe abortion.
Ensuring that women and girls have access to abortion care that is evidence-based – which includes being safe, respectful and non-discriminatory – is fundamental to meeting the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) relating to good health and well-being (SDG3) and gender equality (SDG5).
Impact
Restricting access to abortion does not reduce the number of abortions; however, it dramatically affects whether abortions attained are safe.
Nearly half of all abortions are unsafe. Unsafe abortions
contribute to preventable maternal mortality and morbidity. Each year an
estimated 7 million women in developing countries are treated in hospital
facilities for complications from unsafe abortion.
Barriers to safe, timely, geographically reachable, affordable, respectful and non-discriminatory abortion care can cause emotional distress and violate women’s and girls’ right to privacy; right to equality and non-discrimination; and right to be free from torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment. It also has financial and social implications for people and communities including negatively impacting women’s and girls’ possibilities to obtain education and full and effective participation in society.
Abortion regulations that force people to travel to attain legal care, or that require mandatory counselling or waiting periods, burden health systems and can result in women experiencing travel costs, loss of income or the need to resort to unsafe abortion.
A disproportionate share of resources is used for post-abortion care: in developing countries, treatments of complications of unsafe abortion cost health systems US$ 553 million per year, while households experience US$ 922 million in income loss due to disabilities.
Quality abortion care
Abortion can be safely and effectively performed in a range of settings and by a variety of people, including different types of health workers, and in early pregnancy by the woman herself.
Person-centred, equitable and accessible abortion care supports efficient use of resources and enables women to attain care in line with their values, preferences and circumstances. This is supported by well functioning health systems; availability and accessibility of information; and respect for human rights within a supportive framework of law and policy.
Ensuring that safe and dignified abortion care is attainable in practice by all who need it implies, among other things, that
enough health workers, of different types, provide abortion care within reach;
access to abortion care is enabled through a variety of delivery approaches, including self-management of abortion;
abortion care does not cause financial hardship to women;
laws and policies that cause barriers to quality abortion care (including criminalization of abortion, mandatory waiting periods and third-party authorization requirements) are removed;
health workers are trained to provide safe and respectful care, and to interpret laws and policies in a human rights-compliant way;
access to abortion is not negatively impacted by health workers refusing to provide care based on personal beliefs; and
people have access to accurate and non-biased information to prevent unintended pregnancies and make autonomous decisions about abortion.
Fact sheets
Abortion
Questions and answers
Safe abortion
Databases and tools
Global Abortion Policies Database
Initiatives and groups
BRIDGES for Comprehensive Abortion Care
Technical work
Comprehensive abortion care
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
News
All →
7 August 2023
Departmental update
New mobile phone app helps healthcare workers provide comprehensive abortion care
12 June 2023
Departmental update
New clinical handbook launched to support quality abortion care
25 April 2023
Departmental update
UN special programme for research on sexual and reproductive health celebrates 50 years
24 April 2023
Departmental update
Siding with science and SRHR: Civil Society Organizations (CSO) Dialogue on SRHR with Dr Tedros
Latest publications
All →
13 October 2025
Abortion care guideline: executive summary, 2nd ed.
The objective of this guideline is to present the complete set of all WHO recommendations and best practice statements relating to abortion. While...
Download
Read More
24 August 2025
Abortion care guideline, 2nd ed
The objective of this guideline is to present the complete set of all WHO recommendations and best practice statements relating to abortion. While legal,...
Download
Read More
3 December 2024
A step-by-step guide to South-South learning exchanges
This guide focuses on interactive learning exchanges with stakeholder
teams exchanging knowledge and experience to help one or both of
the teams work...
Download
Read More
31 December 2023
Potential for strategic purchasing to promote person-centred provision of sexual and reproductive health...
This brief examines the relevance of strategic purchasing in optimizing
person-centred approaches to sexual and reproductive health (SRH)
services and...
Download
Read More
Our work
Supporting use of WHO abortion care tools in communities
Empowering health workers to deliver quality abortion care
Addressing unsafe abortion through a health systems approach
Feature stories
23 September 2025
New digital tools expand access and enhance quality in comprehensive abortion care
22 September 2025
Transforming abortion care starts with education
16 January 2025
South-to-north learning exchanges enhance midwives’ skills in abortion care
6 January 2025
From guidelines to implementation: increasing access to quality abortion care
21 December 2023
Donors making a difference: thank you, contributors
28 September 2023
Widening access to quality abortion care from the grassroots up
6 March 2023
Self-management of medical abortion via telemedicine in Germany
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Medical abortion is a safe, effective method of ending a pregnancy.
Infographic
Quality abortion care is part of the universal right to health and is essential to protect the health of women and girls
Infographic
3 out of 10 of all pregnancies end in an induced abortion.
Infographic
Women and girls should not be required to wait, seek permission, or justify the reason to access abortion care.
Videos
All →
30 August 2023
Comprehensive Abortion Care - Dr Bela Ganatra: HRP@50 Expert Series
7 August 2023
Abortion care: Empowering health workers to empower clients
29 June 2023
WHO Clinical practice handbook for quality abortion care
13 March 2023
WHO Abortion care guideline: 1 year anniversary webinar
Events
XXV FIGO World Congress of Gynecology and Obstetrics
5 – 9 October 2025
International Safe Abortion Day 2025
28 September 2025
Related health topics
Health interventions
Contraception
Human behaviour
Self-care for health and well-being
Socio-political determinants
Gender and health
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health
Populations and demographics
Maternal health