Drought
Skip to main content
Overview
Drought is a prolonged dry period in the natural climate cycle that can occur anywhere in the world. It is a slow-onset disaster characterized by the lack of precipitation, resulting in a water shortage. Drought can have a serious impact on health, agriculture, economies, energy and the environment.
An estimated 55 million people globally are affected by droughts every year, and they are the most serious hazard to livestock and crops in nearly every part of the world. Drought threatens people’s livelihoods, increases the risk of disease and death, and fuels mass migration. Water scarcity impacts 40% of the world’s population, and as many as 700 million people are at-risk of being displaced as a result of drought by 2030.
Rising temperatures caused by climate change are making already dry regions drier and wet regions wetter. In dry regions, this means that when temperatures rise, water evaporates more quickly, and thus increases the risk of drought or prolongs periods of drought. Between 80-90% of all documented disasters from natural hazards during the past 10 years have resulted from floods, droughts, tropical cyclones, heat waves and severe storms.
Impact
When drought causes water and food shortages there can be many impacts on the health of the affected population, which may increase the risk of disease and death. Drought may have acute and  chronic health effects, including:
malnutrition due to the decreased availability of food, including micronutrient deficiency, such as iron-deficiency anaemia;
increased risk of infectious diseases, such as cholera, diarrhoea, and pneumonia, due to acute malnutrition, lack of water and sanitation, and displacement;
psycho-social stress and mental health disorders;
disruption of local health services due to a lack of water supplies, loss of buying power, migration and/or health workers being forced to leave local areas.
Severe drought can also affect air quality by making wildfires and dust storms more likely, increasing health risk in people already impacted by lung diseases, like asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or with heart disease.
WHO Response
As the health cluster lead for global emergencies, WHO works with Member States and partners to respond to drought-related disasters. This includes calling for and coordinating emergency funding to support health actions and assembling mobile heath
teams and outreach. WHO also works to ensure appropriate food supplementation is available to the affected areas, as well as support for child, maternal and mental health services.
Drought can be a catalyst for outbreaks of other diseases due to reduced water for drinking, cooking and sanitation, and strains on food resources. WHO works to provide epidemic surveillance, early warning and response programs and preventative immunization
efforts to mitigate the effects of disease in drought-stricken areas.
Food production is particularly at risk from drought, the implications of which can last long after the drought itself is over. Droughts can also cause large numbers
of people to become refugees in neighbouring areas or countries, which stretches the resources of the host area. WHO works to reduce the impacts of these effects through coordination with aid agencies and governments.
Fact sheets
Mental health in emergencies
Questions and answers
Climate change: Land degradation and desertification
Malnutrition: Emergencies and disasters
Emergencies: Humanitarian Health Action
Databases and tools
Disaster statistics - UNDRR
Emergency situations
Drought and food insecurity in the greater Horn of Africa
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 64.10 Strengthening national health emergency and disaster management capacities and resilience of health systems
Training
Incident Management System (Tier 1)
Technical work
Health Emergencies Programme
Climate change
80-90%
of disasters
80-90% of natural disasters in the last 10 years are from floods, droughts and severe storms.
Find out more
700 million
people
700 million people are at-risk of being displaced as a result of drought by 2030.
Find out more
News
All →
2 November 2023
Departmental update
Climate change and noncommunicable diseases: connections
14 June 2018
Departmental update
WHO Afghanistan and health cluster partners scale up activities to assist people affected by drought
11 May 2017
News release
WHO calls for immediate action to save lives in Somalia
23 December 2002
Departmental update
To save lives, WHO rushes medical supplies to drought-ridden Ethiopia
Publications
All →
1 January 2018
Chemical releases associated with earthquakes
This leaflet provides brief information about Natech and other
chemical releases caused directly or indirectly by earthquakes.
It is an extract from...
Download
Read More
1 January 2013
I'm prepared for emergencies
Friends power is a series of health education comic stories developed for children. It aims to build the knowledge, attitude and skills of children on...
Download
Read More
30 October 2007
Mass casualty management systems : strategies and guidelines for building health sector capacity
The common gaps in health system preparedness around the world are generally well understood, but they are often not addressed in a comprehensive and systematic...
Download
Read More
23 February 2004
Food and nutrition needs in emergencies
UNHCR, UNICEF, WFP and WHO have jointly developed these guidelines as a practical tool for assessing, estimating and monitoring the food and nutrition...
Download
Read More
Our work
Building a skilled workforce to prepare for and respond to emergencies
Rapidly detecting and responding to health emergencies
Managing environmental health risks in emergencies
Supporting countries to protect human health from climate change
Videos
All →
11 September 2022
EWARS for Climate-Sensitive Diseases: Session 1: Surveillance for outbreak prediction and response - Part 1
21 October 2016
WHO: Emergencies surveillance - Early Warning Alert and Response System
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Drought
21 October 2021
Rising temperatures increase the risk of drought
Infographic
Famine and health
Related health topics
Disasters
Climate change
Physical environment
Environmental health