Mental health
Skip to main content
Overview
Mental health is a state of mental well-being that enables people to cope with the stresses of life, realize their abilities, learn well and work well, and contribute to their community. It has intrinsic and instrumental value and is integral to our well-being.
At any one time, a diverse set of individual, family, community and structural factors may combine to protect or undermine mental health. Although most people are resilient, people who are exposed to adverse circumstances – including poverty, violence, disability and inequality – are at higher risk of developing a mental health condition.
Many mental health conditions can be effectively treated at relatively low cost, yet health systems remain significantly under-resourced and treatment gaps are wide all over the world. Mental health care is often poor in quality when delivered. People with mental health conditions often also experience stigma, discrimination and human rights violations.
Impact
Mental health conditions include mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities as well as other mental states associated with significant distress, impairment in functioning or risk of self-harm.
In 2019, 970 million people globally were living with a mental disorder, with anxiety and depression the most common.
Mental health conditions can cause difficulties in all aspects of life, including relationships with family, friends and community. They can result from or lead to problems at school and at work.
Globally, mental disorders account for 1 in 6 years lived with disability. People with severe mental health conditions die 10 to 20 years earlier than the general population. And having a mental health condition increases the risk of suicide and experiencing human rights violations.
The economic consequences of mental health conditions are also enormous, with productivity losses significantly outstripping the direct costs of care.
WHO Response
All WHO Member States are committed to implementing the
Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030
, which aims to improve mental health by strengthening governance, providing community-based care, implementing promotion and prevention strategies, and strengthening information systems, evidence and research.
WHO’s
World mental health report: transforming mental health for all
called on all countries to accelerate progress towards implementing the action plan by deepening the value given to mental health, prioritizing mental health promotion and prevention, and developing networks of community-based services.
In 2019, WHO launched the
WHO Special Initiative for Mental Health (2019–2023): Universal Health Coverage for Mental Health
to ensure access to quality and affordable mental health care for 100 million more people in 12 priority countries.
WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP)
similarly aims to scale up services for mental, neurological and substance use disorders, especially in low- and middle-income countries.
As part of the
QualityRights
Initiative, WHO has developed a comprehensive package of training and guidance materials to build capacity in implementing a human rights and recovery approach to mental health care.
Fact sheets
Anxiety disorders
Bipolar disorder
Depressive disorder (depression)
Mental disorders
Mental health
Mental health at work
Mental health in emergencies
Mental health of adolescents
Mental health of older adults
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Refugee and migrant mental health
Schizophrenia
Suicide
Questions and answers
Mental health: Promoting and protecting human rights
Stress
Suicide
Databases and tools
Global Burden of Disease: Results Tool
Global Health Estimates
Mental Health Atlas 2020
Suicide data
WHO MiNDbank
Initiatives and groups
LIVE LIFE Initiative for Suicide Prevention
mhGAP programme
Special Initiative for Mental Health
Strategic and Technical Advisory Group on Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use (STAG-MNS)
WHO/UNICEF Helping Adolescents Thrive Initiative
WHO/UNICEF Joint Programme on Mental Health and Psychosocial Well-being and Development of Children and Adolescents
Resolutions and decisions
WHA74.14: Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030
Technical work
Department of Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use
News
All →
7 November 2025
Statement
Joint call to strengthen policy and investment for child and youth mental health and well-being
14 October 2025
News release
11 million lives lost each year: urgent action needed on neurological care
9 October 2025
Feature story
Learner spotlight: Emmanuel’s mental health mission in the Philippines
26 September 2025
News release
World leaders show strong support for political declaration on noncommunicable diseases and mental health
Latest publications
All →
19 November 2025
Problem Management Plus (PM+) psychological intervention for individuals: training manual
This training manual is for people or organizations wanting to train helpers to deliver Individual Problem Management Plus. It contains all the information...
Download
Read More
11 November 2025
Preventing suicide: how to start a suicide bereavement support group
This resource was written to support persons who seek to initiate a support group for suicide loss survivors. Suicide bereavement support groups offer...
Download
Read More
11 November 2025
Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) guideline for mental, neurological and substance use disorders:...
This guideline includes 48 updated and new evidence-based recommendations related to MNS conditions. The guideline is targeted towards non-specialized...
Download
Read More
4 November 2025
Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders
In May 2022, Member States adopted the Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022-2031, which aims to improve access...
Download
Read More
Our work
Advocating for national suicide prevention strategies
Strengthening surveillance of suicide and self-harm
Monitoring and sharing suicide data and statistics
Promoting rights-based policy & law for mental health
Ensuring a coordinated and effective mental health response in emergencies
Scaling up care for mental, neurological, and substance use disorders: mhGAP
Improving the mental and brain health of children and adolescents
Feature stories
All →
23 October 2025
Cross-country learning to strengthen systems for children and young people’s mental health.
9 October 2025
Beyond survival: mental health on the frontlines of crisis
9 October 2025
Mental health in emergencies feature profile: Ms Rajiah Abu Sway, Mental Health Lead, WHO in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (oPt)
9 October 2025
Mental health in emergencies feature profile: Dr Nabil Samarji, Mental Health Officer, WHO Office for Syria
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Solutions to strengthen social connection
Infographic
Defining social connection, loneliness and social isolation
Infographic
Loneliness is a global problem
Infographic
Drivers of social isolation and loneliness
Videos
All →
8 October 2025
Ethiopia - Emergencies preparedness: Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
8 October 2025
Tunisia - Emergencies preparedness: Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
8 October 2025
Estonia - WHO’s Mental Health and Psychosocial Support Global Simulation Exercise
7 October 2025
Estonia - Emergencies preparedness: Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
Event
Social Connection as a Foundation for Inclusive Development: Implementing the WHO Commission’s Call to Action — WSSDII Solution Session
6 November 2025 11:30 – 12:45 Saudi Arabia Time
World Mental Health Day 2025 Webinar
10 October 2025 14:00 – 15:00 CET
2025
World Mental Health Day 2025 - Mental health in humanitarian emergencies
10 October 2025
Campaigns
World Mental Health Day
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Conditions
Depression
Diseases and conditions
Epilepsy
Health interventions
Suicide prevention