Wildfires
Skip to main content
Overview
Wildfires are increasing around the globe in frequency, severity and duration, heightening the need to understand the health effects of wildfire exposure. The risk of wildfires grows in extremely dry conditions, such as drought, heat waves and during high winds.
Wildfire smoke is a mixture of hazardous air pollutants, such PM
2.5
, NO
2
, ozone, aromatic hydrocarbons, or lead. In addition to contaminating the air with toxic pollutants, wildfires also simultaneously impact the climate by releasing large quantities of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
With climate change leading to warmer temperatures and drier conditions and the increasing urbanization of rural areas, the fire season is starting earlier and ending later. Wildfire events are getting more extreme in terms of acres burned, duration and intensity, and they can disrupt transportation, communications, water supply, and power and gas services.
Impact
Wildfires that burn near populated areas can have significant impact on the environment, property, livestock and human mortality and morbidity depending on the size, speed and proximity to the fire, and whether the population has advanced warning to evacuate.
Wildfire smoke is a mixture of air pollutants of which particulate matter (PM) is the principal public health threat.
PM
2.5
from wildfire smoke is associated with premature deaths in the general population, and can cause and exacerbate diseases of the lungs, heart, brain/nervous system, skin, gut, kidney, eyes, nose and liver. It has also been shown to lead to cognitive impairment and memory loss. Firefighters and emergency response workers are also greatly impacted by injuries, burns and smoke inhalation, particularly at high concentrations.
More interdisciplinary research is warranted to understand the latent and long-term health effects of wildfire exposure on vulnerable populations (children, older people, pregnant people, chronically ill people), particularly for geographic areas enduring repeated and cyclical exposure to these wildﬁre events.
WHO Response
The magnitude of the physical and human costs from wildfires can be reduced if adequate emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery measures are implemented in a sustainable and timely manner.
Working with Member States, WHO helps to build resilient and proactive health systems that can anticipate the needs and challenges during emergencies, so that we can be more likely to reduce risks and respond effectively when needed.
WHO works with partners in preparing, preventing, detecting, responding and recovering from emergencies and disasters, including environmental exposures, such as
implementing early warning systems and issuing health and air quality advisories;
containing the release of hazardous materials;
assessing health needs of the community and infrastructure damage;
restoring primary care services, like immunization, child and maternal health, and mental health;
strengthening human resources for disaster management;
collecting, analysing and disseminating information related to emergencies and disasters that are likely to occur in a region;
establishing and managing stocks of relief supplies and equipment;
calling for emergency funding to support health action; and
developing national policies, recommendations and national emergency response plans.
Fact sheets
Burns
Climate change
Mercury
Mental health in emergencies
Ambient (outdoor) air pollution
Database and tools
Ambient air quality database
Initiatives and groups
ClimaHealth platform
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 72.9 WHO global strategy on health, environment and climate change: the transformation needed to improve lives and well-being sustainably through healthy environments
WHA 64.10 Strengthening national health emergency and disaster management capacities and resilience of health systems
WHA69.18 Health and the environment: draft road map for an enhanced global response to the adverse effects of air pollution
WHA68.8 Health and the environment: addressing the health impact of air pollution
Technical work
Climate change and health
Air quality and health
Latest publications
All →
3 July 2024
Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance in health and environment, 2024 update
This is the 2024 update of the Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment.
The Compendium is a comprehensive collection of available...
Download
Read More
23 January 2024
Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment: version with International Classification...
In this version of the compendium, each guidance is coded using the International Classification of Health Interventions (ICHI).The compendium provides...
Download
Read More
1 April 2022
Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment, 2022 update
This updated version of the compendium provides a systematic compilation of published guidance from WHO and other UN organizations on health and environment....
Download
Read More
22 September 2021
WHO global air quality guidelines: particulate matter (‎PM2.5 and PM10)‎, ozone, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur...
Clean air is fundamental to health. Compared to 15 years ago, when the previous edition
of these guidelines was published, there is now a much stronger...
Download
Read More
Related health topics
Physical environment
Air pollution
Disasters
Climate change