Brain health
Skip to main content
Overview
Brain health is the state of brain functioning across cognitive, sensory,
social-emotional, behavioural and motor domains, allowing a person to realize
their full potential over the life course, irrespective of the presence or
absence of disorders.
Different determinants related to physical health, healthy environments,
safety and security, life-long learning and social connection as well as access
to quality services influence the way our brains develop, adapt and respond to
stress and adversity. These give way to strategies for promotion and
prevention across the life course.
Optimizing brain health
by addressing these determinants not only improves mental and
physical health but also creates positive social and economic impacts that
contribute to greater well-being and help advance society.
However, conditions affecting the brain and nervous system in general emerge
throughout the life course and are characterized by disruptions in brain
growth, damage to brain structure and/or impaired brain functioning. These
include for example congenital and neurodevelopmental conditions as well as
neurological disorders across the life. Health and social care for these
conditions require multisectoral and interdisciplinary collaborations with a holistic
person-centred approach focused on promotion, prevention, treatment, care and
rehabilitation and the active engagement of persons with lived experience,
their families and carers.
Burden
The global burden of neurological and neurodevelopmental conditions is high,
with approximately 70% of the burden in low- and middle-income countries.
Neurological conditions are the leading cause of disability adjusted life years
(DALYs) and account for about 9 million deaths per year.
The largest contributors of neurological DALYs in 2016 were stroke (42.2%),
migraine (16.3%), dementia (10.4%), meningitis (7.9%) and epilepsy (5%).
Parkinson disease, propelled by an increasingly ageing population, is the
fastest growing neurological disorder. Premature birth, neonatal encephalopathy
and neuroinfections contribute substantially to high disease burden in South-East
Asia and Africa. In 2016, developmental disabilities accounted for 13.3% of the
29.3 million years lived with disability for all health conditions among
children younger than 5 years.
Despite the large burden, only 28% of low-income countries have a dedicated
policy for neurological diseases in comparison with 64% of high-income
countries. Available resources for these conditions are insufficient in most
countries, with unacceptably high treatment gaps for many neurological and
neurodevelopmental conditions. For example, in low- and middle-income
countries, there are only three adult neurologists per 10 million people while
high-income countries have approximately 160 times more. Resources for the
assessment and care of children with neurological and neurodevelopmental
conditions are even more scarce.
WHO Response
In May 2022, WHO Member States adopted the
Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022–2031
. This action plan aims to improve care, recovery, well-being and participation of people living with neurological disorders across the life-course, while reducing associated mortality, morbidity and disability associated with neurological conditions.
In the context of Universal Health Coverage and the UN Sustainable Development Goals and in line with WHO’s existing mandates for conditions affecting the brain such as
autism spectrum disorder
,
epilepsy
and
dementia
, WHO’s brain health work is focused on promoting optimal brain development, cognitive health and well-being across the life course. The main activities involve:
strengthening policies, service delivery, health information systems, technology      (including but not limited to artificial intelligence, e-health and big      data), research and innovation, especially in low- and middle-income      countries;
providing technical assistance on how to formulate an integrated approach to brain      health conditions focused on promotion, prevention, treatment, care and      rehabilitation, focusing on low- and middle-income countries; and
fostering increased investment and inter-agency collaboration globally as well as      the involvement of different specialties and sectors.
Fact sheets
Autism
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs)
Dementia
Epilepsy
Guillain–Barré syndrome
Migraine and other headache disorders
Japanese encephalitis
Meningitis
Parkinson disease
Spinal cord injury
Tetanus
Zika virus
Databases and tools
ATLAS Country Resources for Neurological Disorders
Global Dementia Observatory
Resolutions and decisions
WHA75.11: decision to adopt the Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022–2031
WHA67.8: Comprehensive and coordinated efforts for the management of autism spectrum disorders
WHA68.20: Global burden of epilepsy and the need for coordinated action at the country level to address its health, social and public knowledge implications
WHA66.8: Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2020
WHA70/28: Draft global action plan on the public health response to dementia: report by the Director-General
WHA66/8: Draft comprehensive global monitoring framework and targets for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases: report by the Director-General
Technical work
Department of Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use
Maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health
News
All →
14 October 2025
News release
11 million lives lost each year: urgent action needed on neurological care
10 April 2025
News release
WHO launches first-ever guidelines on meningitis diagnosis, treatment and care
17 February 2025
Departmental update
WHO launches new technical brief on encephalitis
23 October 2024
Departmental update
WHO publishes preferred product characteristics for blood tests for Alzheimer disease
Latest publications
All →
11 November 2025
Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) guideline for mental, neurological and substance use disorders:...
This guideline includes 48 updated and new evidence-based recommendations related to MNS conditions. The guideline is targeted towards non-specialized...
Download
Read More
4 November 2025
Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders
In May 2022, Member States adopted the Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022-2031, which aims to improve access...
Download
Read More
12 October 2025
Global status report on neurology
Neurological conditions are the leading cause of ill health and disability, affecting over 1 in 3 people worldwide. The Global status report on neurology...
Download
Read More
28 August 2025
WHO guidelines on meningitis diagnosis, treatment and care: executive summary
In line with the Defeating meningitis by 2030: a global
road map, the WHO guidelines on meningitis diagnosis, treatment and care
Executive Summary provides...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
8 February 2019
Scaling up epilepsy care in Myanmar
8 February 2019
The Fight against epilepsy in Ghana
8 February 2019
Pilot studies help close the epilepsy treatment gap
24 February 2016
Zika response accelerates as WHO Director-General visits Brazil
Videos
27 November 2017
mhGAP: training videos
5 January 2010
mhGAP: mental health care in low resource settings - video showing that millions can be treated at low cost
29 June 2009
WHO: Introduction to mental health
Podcast
Episode #103 - Brain health
How can you keep your brain healthy and who is at risk of poor brain health? Dr Tarun Dua explains all you need to know about brain health in Science in 5.
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Dementia
Diseases and conditions
Epilepsy
Communicable diseases
Meningitis
Health and wellbeing
Mental health