Hospitals
Skip to main content
Overview
Hospitals complement and amplify the effectiveness of many other parts of the health system, providing continuous availability of services for acute and complex conditions. They concentrate scarce resources within well-planned referral networks to respond efficiently to population health needs. They are an essential element of
Universal Health Coverage (UHC)
and will be critical to meeting the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG).
Hospitals are also an essential part of
health system
development. Currently, external pressures, health systems shortcomings and hospital sector deficiencies are driving a new vision for hospitals in many parts of the world. In this vision, they have a key role to play to support other healthcare providers and for community outreach and home-based services and are essential in a well-functioning referral network.
Hospitals matter to people and often mark central points in their lives. They also matter to health systems by being instrumental for care coordination and integration. They often provide a setting for education of doctors, nurses and other health-care professionals and are a critical base for clinical research.
Impact
Hospitals should reflect the needs and values of the communities in and around them, while also being resilient and able to maintain and scale up services in emergency situations. Effective hospitals are designed for their users, with attention to the needs of special populations, such as children and the elderly. A well-designed hospital environment maximizes the effectiveness of clinical care delivery and enhances the well-being of patients and hospital staff.
Adequate and reliable infrastructure, technologies and supplies form the backbone of the hospital. Key infrastructure (such as well-planned spaces, water and energy, telecommunications) must support daily functioning, and be designed with redundancy to ensure continued safe and effective operation, even during a disaster or crisis. Appropriate and good quality medical and ICT technologies and supplies should be available for specialized
health workforce
to meet the population needs.
Hospital functions and organization vary according to health-care delivery organizations and each hospital’s unique position in the system. Good management structures ensure coordination among staff, services, infrastructure and supply chains to deliver high-quality care. Clinical registries and structured data audits facilitate rapid identification of high-yield areas for improvement. Regular monitoring of service quality with targeted intervention to address gaps drives ongoing improvement.
Resources
Hospitals are reservoirs of critical resources and knowledge. They can be classified according to the interventions they provide, the roles they play in the health system and the health and educational services they offer to the communities in and around them. They are often the focal point for health care in a community and lead by example for sustainable development, the strengthening of health systems and in building healthy communities. Effective hospitals seek new ways to support care outside their walls to ensure people can be cared for closer to their home, within their community and at a sustainable cost.
Decision-makers at the national and sub-national level create conditions to drive, enable and sustain the paradigm shift in what hospitals do and how they perform. As system architects, they need to maintain oversight of all ongoing health and health system reforms and ensure policies and incentives are coherent and aligned. Major structural reforms outside the health sector, such as decentralization, civil service, privatization and trade, greatly impact the hospital sector and need to be taken into consideration at the macro level when assessing possibilities for hospital sector transformations.
Fact sheets
Patient safety
Primary health care
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Questions and answers
What is universal health coverage?
How significant is the problem of infections in health care across the world?
Q&A on Strengthening Infection Prevention & Control in Healthcare Facilities – focus on Private Sector – webinar on IPC practices
Databases and tools
European database on human and technical resources for health (HlthRes-DB)
Resolutions and decisions
WHA72.6: Global action on patient safety
AFR/RC53/R2: Resolution strengthening the role of hospitals in national health systems in the African region
WHA58.3: Revision of the International Health Regulations
Technical work
Integrated Health Services
News
All →
28 May 2025
Departmental update
Member States endorse World Prematurity Day as official global health campaign
16 April 2025
Departmental update
WHO launches new guide to help boost quality in health services
21 February 2025
Departmental update
World Health Day 2025 to spotlight women and babies’ survival, urging solidarity at a critical moment for global health
28 December 2024
Statement
Kamal Adwan Hospital out of service following a raid yesterday and repeated attacks since October
Latest publications
All →
29 October 2025
Kangaroo mother care: a clinical practice guide
This guide is designed to help health workers support mothers and families in practising Kangaroo Mother Care (KMC) in health facilities at all levels...
Download
Read More
29 October 2025
Parent counselling guide on kangaroo mother care (KMC)
This guide supports health workers in counselling parents and families of preterm and low birth weight (LBW) newborns on the essential practice of Kangaroo...
Download
Read More
16 June 2025
Workload Indicators of Staffing Need (WISN): software manual
The WISN application is a software tool for recording, analyzing, and reporting data related to
staffing status and needs at health facilities.
Learning...
Download
Read More
15 June 2025
Digital adaptation kit for birth defects surveillance: operational requirements for implementing WHO...
Congenital anomalies, also known as birth defects, are structural or functional abnormalities, including metabolic disorders, that are present at birth....
Download
Read More
Our work
Making health facilities safe in emergencies and disasters
Promoting baby-friendly hospitals
Strengthening quality midwifery for all mothers and newborns
Enhancing radiation safety in health care
Prioritizing medical devices
Strengthening medical imaging
Feature stories
All →
17 February 2022
PAHO/WHO and UK-FCDO Handover four Smart Health Care facilities in Belize to the MoHW
26 January 2022
PAHO & UKaid Handover Nine Smart Health Facilities to Jamaica
14 January 2021
Indonesia: WHO helps assess and improve COVID-19 pandemic preparedness and response capacity
17 December 2020
Albania: Engaging with media to encourage accurate reporting on COVID-19
Videos
All →
5 June 2025
Improving quality of care to save lives in Sierra Leone
Planting the seeds for hospitals to flourish
Guests: Ann-Lise Guisset and Boris Kouomogne Nteungue
12 January 2025
Strengthening implementation of home-based records for maternal, newborn and child health
4 March 2024
Autonomisation des hôpitaux: opportunités et pièges
Campaigns
World Patient Safety Day
17 September
Learn more
Related health topics
All →
Health systems
Emergency and critical care
Health systems
Health systems governance
Health systems
Infection prevention and control
Health systems
Patient safety
Health systems
Primary health care
Other
Universal health coverage