Infection prevention and control GLOBAL
Skip to main content
Overview
Infection prevention and control (IPC) is a practical, evidence-based approach preventing patients and health workers from being harmed by avoidable infections. Effective IPC requires constant action at all levels of the health system, including policymakers, facility managers, health workers and those who access health services. IPC is unique in the field of patient safety and quality of care, as it is universally relevant to every health worker and patient, at every health care interaction. Defective IPC causes harm and can kill. Without effective IPC it is impossible to achieve quality health care delivery.
Infection prevention and control effects all aspects of health care, including hand hygiene, surgical site infections, injection safety, antimicrobial resistance and how hospitals operate during and outside of emergencies. Programmes to support IPC are particularly important in low- and middle-income countries, where health care delivery and medical hygiene standards may be negatively affected by secondary infections.
WHO Response
Much of the work done on infection prevention and control (IPC) is hidden, as by its nature it prevents issues rather than treating them after the fact. However, health care-associated infections (HAIs) are an ongoing problem that no health authority can afford to ignore. To help in this fight, WHO has created a number of programmes and campaigns that set standards for evidence-based recommendations and operating procedures and promote behaviours to limit avoidable infections.
The first WHO Global Patient Challenge laid the foundations for the IPC Global Unit, which works to support country capacity-building for IPC action. Through this programme, WHO provides technical assistance for developing local IPC policies and guidelines, performs in-country assessments, convenes meetings focused on guideline development and provides ongoing support for health care providers.
WHO also makes a global annual call to action for health workers though the SAVE LIVES: Clean Your Hands campaign held each May. This campaign seeks to educate health workers and patients on the importance of effective hand washing, the need for which has become more acute with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fact sheets
Patient safety
Antimicrobial resistance
Questions and answers
Q&A on infection prevention and control for health care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed 2019-nCoV
Databases and tools
Implementation tools
Disease Outbreak News
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Ebola virus disease
Initiatives and groups
Private organisations for patient safety
Global Infection Prevention and Control Network (GIPC Network)
SAVE LIVES: Clean Your Hands 5 May 2022
Resolutions and decisions
WHA55.18: Quality of care: patient safety
WHA72.5: Antimicrobial resistance
WHA72.6: Global action on patient safety
WHA72.7: Water, sanitation and hygiene in health care facilities
Technical work
Infection prevention and control unit
News
All →
11 November 2025
Departmental update
World Pneumonia Day – 12 November 2025
23 May 2025
Departmental update
Progress on infection prevention and control
5 May 2025
News release
Gloves do not replace hand hygiene – reminder from WHO
9 April 2025
Departmental update
Global Sepsis Alliance hosts annual World Sepsis Congress
Latest publications
All →
13 October 2025
Workshop on Strengthening Infection Prevention and Control in the Western Pacific Region, Manila, Philippines,...
Download
Read More
5 August 2025
Emerging from the Unknowing: WHO India’s strategic response to the pandemic
Emerging from the Unknowing chronicles WHO India's vital technical and field support to the Government of India during the COVID-19 response—an extraordinary...
Download
Read More
21 July 2025
Impact of contraceptive use on women’s health and socioeconomic status: evidence brief
In 2022, an estimated 874 million women of reproductive age (15–49 years) were using a modern method of contraception, reflecting the widespread...
Download
Read More
24 June 2025
Strategic actions for infection prevention and control and water, sanitation and hygiene during mpox...
This executive summary provides an overview of the mpox infection prevention and control (IPC) and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) strategic actions...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
14 November 2024
Infection, prevention and control excellence in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia: reducing central line-associated bloodstream infections
25 September 2024
Donors making a difference: United against mpox, swift and effective response in action
12 July 2024
Donors making a difference for WHO’s work to save lives in Sudan and South Sudan
18 June 2024
Development partners making a difference: The European Union supports WHO in eight Asian countries to prepare for the future
Latest infographics
All →
Infographic
Steps to remove personal protective equipment (PPE) for mpox
Infographic
Steps to put on
personal protective equipment (PPE) for mpox
How to make soapy water solution
Infographic
IPC measures for Ebola and Marburg disease: past and present
Videos
All →
16 April 2025
Burkina Faso: new infectious diseases unit ­– WHO's achievement explained by Dr Seydou Coulibaly
15 April 2025
It Might Be Gloves… But It’s ALWAYS Hand Hygiene!
15 October 2024
WHO IPC global webinar recording - Launch of the HAI handbook
30 April 2024
Testing your knowledge on hand hygiene: A novel serious game entitled, "My 5 Moments: the Game"
Events
All →
From Data to Impact: Advancing Healthcare Associated Infection Surveillance for Safer Care and a Healthier Future
24 November 2025 13:30 – 15:00 CET
Preventing and managing maternal sepsis
24 November 2025 12:00 – 13:00 CET
Launch event: Development and implementation of national action plans for infection prevention and control - a practical guide
23 June 2025 13:00 – 14:30 CET
Related health topics
Physical environment
Antimicrobial resistance
Communicable diseases
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
Health systems
Patient safety
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)