Health budget
Skip to main content
Overview
Raising domestic public funds is essential for universal health coverage (UHC). No country has made significant progress toward UHC without increasing reliance on public revenues. Therefore, domestic tax systems that are essential to support country’s fiscal space expansion are central to the UHC agenda.
While the level of revenues matter, the allocation and use of these revenues are two crucial elements in supporting effective progress toward UHC. Public Financial Management (PFM) systems are key enabling factors to support appropriate formulation, execution and accounting of government expenditure.
In health, countries face challenges at all stages of the PFM cycle. Key questions include:
How to align budget allocations with sector needs?
How to ensure effective disbursement?
How to make the budget system more accountable and transparent?
As part of the
Montreux Collaborative Agenda on Fiscal Space, PFM and Health Financing
, WHO is supporting countries and partners in fostering dialogue between health and finance authorities, with the aim to strengthen domestic PFM systems and make budget practices more effective toward UHC.
Good practices
Generally, the key features of a well-functioning budgeting system typically include:
Multi-year planning and budgeting
Policy or output-oriented allocation
Realistic and credible estimates of costs
Open and transparent consultation processes.
In health, proactive engagement of health ministries in the budgeting process can facilitate alignment of budget allocations with sector priorities, as laid out in national health strategies and plans. The development of multi-year plans and budgets is likely to improve predictability in the sector’s resources. If the health budget is formulated according to sector goals or outputs and the execution rules align with this logic, it will make budgets more responsive to sector needs than if the formulation follows an input-based approach. A quality performance framework of budgets will also facilitate financial and operational accountability in health.
Fact sheets
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Data
WHO repository of health budgets
Country mapping of health budget classifications
Global Health Expenditure Database
Guidelines
Budget matters for health: key formulation and classification issues
Aligning Public Financial Management and Health Financing
Process guide for identifying issues and fostering dialogue in public financial management
Developing a national health financing strategy:a reference guide
WHO Resolutions
WHA resolution: Sustainable health financing structures and universal coverage (2011) - WHA64.9
WHA resolution: Sustainable health financing, universal coverage and social health insurance (2005) WHA58.33
WHO
Teams
Health Financing
Nearly 50%
of African countries
introduced programme budgets in health enhancing accountability and transparency
Read more
Many countries
spend less than 80% of their annual budget allocation for health
Read more
Our work
Assessing country progress in health financing for UHC
Fostering fiscal dialogue between finance and health
Implementing health financing reform
Leveraging public financial management for better health
Pooling revenues and reducing fragmentation
Promoting strategic purchasing
Publications
21 September 2021
Transition to programme budgeting in Uganda: status of the reform and preliminary lessons for health
Many countries have initiated transitions to programme-based budgeting (PBB) to better align budgets to public policy priorities and to enhance accountability...
Download
Read More
3 August 2020
Budgeting for results in health: key features, achievements and challenges in Peru
There is no universal health coverage (UHC) without public financing, making public budgeting a central piece of UHC reforms. Peru has made significant...
Download
Read More
3 August 2020
Health financing and budgeting reforms in Gabon: Progress and challenges on the road to universal health...
Despite significant efforts, health financing reforms in Gabon have not been fully implemented. Public funding as a share of total health expenditure increased...
Download
Read More
11 June 2018
Budget matters for health: key formulation and classification issues
Robust public budgeting in the health sector is a necessary condition to enable the effective implementation of health financing reforms towards universal...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
12 December 2018
Public Spending on Health: A Closer Look at Global Trends
13 June 2018
Geert van Maanen on finance and health dialogue. WHO Regional Office for Europe
11 December 2015
Universal Health Coverage - What does it mean?
Related health topics
Health systems
Common goods for health
Health systems
Health accounts
Health systems
Health financing
Other
Universal health coverage
Related links
IMF Government Finance Statistics
IMF PFM blog
Leveraging Public Finance Management for better health in Africa: key considerations for decision-makers
Let managers manage: a health service provider’s perspective on public financial management
Contact
To contact us, please send an email to:
healthfinancing@who.int