Medicines
Skip to main content
Overview
The first synthetic pharmaceutical, Aspirin, was introduced in 1897. Since then there have been incredible advances in drugs for a wide range of health concerns including disease, mental health and other conditions. Today there are thousands of drugs
on the market able to prevent, treat and lessen the impact of ailments that would have been fatal just a few generations ago. At the same time, antimicrobial resistance is challenging the effectiveness of many commonly used medicines in one of the
most concerning threats to global health today.
Access to appropriate medications is shown to have substantial impacts on community health and the related economic indicators. Quality-assured, safe and effective medicines, vaccines and medical
devices are fundamental to a functioning health system. However, globalized trade can undermine regulation, and in resource-limited settings especially, incidence of substandard or falsified medicines is growing. Working to increase access to essential
pharmaceuticals while limiting the spread of falsified products is at the heart of WHO’s global strategy on medicines.
Impact
Equal access and the reliable supply of medicines is an
ongoing goal of WHO and global health delivery systems, the achievement of
which is hampered by several factors. The first is regulatory issues, which can
affect how medicines are bought to market, create lag times and cause the
supply of medicines in some areas of the globe to be delayed long after they
are available elsewhere. High prices, misuse of drugs and poor or unreliable
drug quality contribute to this issue. Price has long been a barrier in poor
countries, but because of sharp increases in recent years, this issue is
spreading to some wealthy countries as well.
The price of medicine remains the largest impediment to
access and the economic impact of pharmaceuticals is substantial. They are the
largest public expenditure on health after personal costs in many low-income
countries, and the expense is a major cause of household impoverishment and
debt. Public expenditure ranges widely between nations, from under 20% of total
healthcare costs in high-income countries to up to 66% in low-income countries.
WHO response
Universal health coverage can only be achieved when there
is affordable access to safe, effective and quality medicines and health
products. WHO works with partners and Member States to strengthen regulation,
including post-marketing surveillance, and to eliminate substandard and
falsified medicines. It also develops international norms and standards so that
countries worldwide can regulate health products and technologies consistently.
In parallel, WHO facilitates access to quality-assured, safe and effective health
products by assessing medicines, vaccines and medical devices for priority
diseases, while working to fight the growing issue of antibacterial resistance.
Since 1977, WHO has maintained a list of essential
medicines as a means to promote health equity around the world. This list began
with 208 identified medicines and has grown to include 460 different
pharmaceuticals. Although it was not designed as a global standard, the list
now acts as a guide for the procurement and supply of medicines at the national
and local level.
Fact sheets
Antimicrobial resistance
Essential medicines
HIV drug resistance
Multi-drug resistant gonorrhoea
Palliative care
Prequalification of medicines by WHO
Primary health care
Substandard and falsified medical products
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Questions and answers
Fair pricing forum questions and answers
What is antimicrobial resistance?
What sort of supplies are in a standard emergency health kit?
Databases and tools
eEML - WHO model list of essential medicines
National Essential Medicines Lists
WHO Prequalified Vaccines
Medicines quality database
Antimicrobial resistance: conserving life-saving medicines takes everyone’s help
Initiatives and groups
AWaRe - Handle antibiotics with care
Resolutions and decisions
WHA69.25: Addressing the global shortage of medicines and vaccines
WHA60.16: Progress in the rational use of medicines
WHA54.11: WHO medicines strategy
WHA76.3: Increasing access to medical oxygen
Technical work
Health product and policy standards
Regulation and prequalification
Quality assurance guidelines
News
All →
13 October 2025
Medical product alert
Medical Product Alert N°5/2025: Substandard (contaminated) oral liquid medicines
20 November 2025
Departmental update
World Children’s Day: accelerating access to better medicines for children
16 November 2025
Departmental update
A flagship program: Virtual cGMP Training Marathon to build manufacturing workforce skills across all WHO regions
2 October 2025
Departmental update
WHO’s 6th Virtual cGMP Training Marathon concludes, reinforcing global manufacturing capacities
Publications
All →
20 November 2025
Paediatric drug optimization for epilepsy: meeting report, 1-2 July 2025
The PADO for epilepsy exercise aimed to support the identification of short- and long term priorities for epilepsy medicines for the paediatric age group,...
Download
Read More
20 November 2025
Towards closing the gap in access to child-friendly formulations of essential medicines
Over four years, under the framework of GAP-f, WHO comprehensively
reviewed formulations of medicines listed on the EMLc to inform the 2023
and 2025...
Download
Read More
14 November 2025
Paediatric drug optimization for malaria: meeting report, 24-26 June 2025
This report provides a synthesis of the outcomes of the first paediatric drug optimization exercise that was held for Malaria. The PADO for malaria meeting...
Download
Read More
7 November 2025
The global smart
pharmacovigilance strategy
Trust in regulated medical products (medicines, vaccines and other health products)
to protect health, is mostly based on a number of principles: the...
Download
Read More
The World Medicines Situation
9 April 2004
The World Medicines Situation - 2nd edition
This second review of the world medicines situation (first published in 1988 as The World
Drug Situation) presents the available evidence on global production,...
Download
Read More
11 April 2011
The World Medicines Situation 2011- Access to controlled medicines, 3rd edition
Millennium Development Goal 8E aims for affordable access to essential medicines.
Essential medicines, as defined by WHO, are those that “satisfy...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
12 November 2025
Saudi Arabia: Council of Health Insurance Drug Formulary 2025 (English)
Saudi Arabia: Council of Health Insurance Drug Formulary 2025 (English)
12 November 2025
Switzerland: Spezialitätenliste 2025 (German)
Switzerland: Spezialitätenliste 2025 (German)
12 November 2025
New Zealand: Hospital Medicines Schedule 2025 (English)
New Zealand: Hospital Medicines Schedule 2025 (English)
Our work
All →
Strengthening access to essential medicines
Promoting rational use of medicines
Ensuring fair prices for medicines
Facilitating access to patent information
Feature stories
All →
27 February 2020
Digital version of Essential Medicines list  (eEML) launched
4 September 2018
Tanzania making steady progress in access to essential medicines and health products as new challenges emerge
4 September 2018
Pioneering methadone programme gives hope to thousands in Dar es Salaam
28 March 2018
In Hanoi, WHO’s collaboration provides a rosy picture of health
Videos
All →
20 May 2016
Access to Medicines
7 May 2018
Amala's story: how to prevent antimicrobial resistance
25 May 2016
WHO: Pioneering methadone programme gives hope to thousands in Dar es Salaam
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Poster: We urgently need more effective medicines
Infographic
MedMon App - Measuring access to health products
Infographic
WHO-EUL-Facilitated Procedure (WHO EUL-FP)
Events
All →
INN Session with INN stakeholders
21 April 2026 09:00 – 10:30 UTC Time
82nd INN Consultation
21 – 24 April 2026
Expert committees
Expert Committee on Selection and Use of Essential Medicines
Expert Committee on Specifications for Pharmaceutical Preparations (ECSPP)
Expert Committee on Drug Dependence
Advisory Group meeting on fair pricing
Commentaries
10 January 2018
Facilitating access to patent information
Fact file
20 February 2018
Antimicrobial resistance
Resources
British National Formulary
BMJ clinical evidence
E-DRUG
Cochrane collaboration
National library for health (UK)
National Guidelines Clearinghouse (USA)
WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics Methodology,
Oslo - Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification/Defined Daily Dose (DDD)
WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala (Adverse drug reaction database)
Related health topics
Substances
Biologicals
Substances
Drugs (psychoactive)
Behavioural interventions
Health promotion
Socio-political determinants
Intellectual property and trade
Health systems
Substandard and falsified medical products
Other
Universal health coverage