Dracunculiasis (Guinea-worm disease)
Skip to main content
Overview
Guinea-worm disease is caused by the parasitic worm
Dracunculus
medinensis
or Guinea-worm. This worm is the largest of the tissue parasite affecting humans. The adult female, which carries about 3 million embryos, can measure
600 to 800 mm in length and 2 mm in diameter. When a person drinks contaminated water from ponds or shallow open wells, the cyclops is dissolved by the gastric acid of the stomach and the larvae are released and migrate through the intestinal wall.
After 100 days, the male and female meet and mate. The male becomes encapsulated and dies in the tissues while the female moves down the muscle planes. After about one year of the infection, the female worm emerges, usually from the feet, releasing thousands
of larvae and thus repeating the life cycle.
Symptoms
Guinea-worm disease is rarely fatal. Frequently, however, the patient remains sick for several months, mainly because:
The emergence of the worm, sometimes several, is accompanied by painful oedema, intense generalised pruritus, blistering and an ulceration of the area from which the worm emerges;
The migration and emergence of the worms occur in sensitive parts of the body, sometimes the articular spaces can lead to permanent disability;
Ulcers caused by the emergence of the worm invariably develop secondary bacterial infections which exacerbate inflammation and pain resulting in temporary disability; and
Accidental rupture of the worm in the tissue spaces can result in serious allergic reactions.
The epidemiology of the disease is determined largely by the use of open stagnant water sources such as ponds and sometimes shallow or step wells. Human-made ponds are the main source of transmission.
Guinea-worm disease is seasonal, occurring with two broad patterns found in endemic areas of Africa, depending on climatic factors. In the Sahelian zone, transmission generally occurs in the rainy season (May to August). In the humid savanna and forest zone, the peak occurs in the dry season (September to January).
Treatment
No drug is available to prevent or heal this parasitic disease. Dracunculiasis is, however, relatively easy to eliminate and eventually eradicate.
Guinea-worm disease is a vulnerable disease: humans alone are responsible for maintaining its fragile transmission cycle. It is therefore possible to permanently curtail transmission by applying the following measures:
Effective surveillance to detect all cases within 24 hours of worm emergence and containment of all cases;
Ensuring access to safe drinking water and converting unsafe sources to safe ones;
The construction of copings around well heads or the installation of boreholes with handpumps. This would prevent not only dracunculiasis but also diarrhoeal diseases;
Regular and systematic filtering of drinking water derived from ponds and shallow unprotected wells or from surface water. Finely meshed cloth or, better still, a filter made from a 0.15 mm nylon mesh, is all that is needed to filter out the cyclops
from the drinking water;
Treatment of unsafe water sources with temephos to kill the cyclops;
Health education and social mobilization to encourage affected communities to adopt healthy drinking water behaviour.
If these measures are implemented by village communities, the goal of eradicating guinea-worm disease will be achieved.
Fact sheets
Dracunculiasis (Guinea-worm disease)
Questions and answers
What is guinea worm? Is it a real worm?
Databases and tools
Dracunculiasis Eradication Portal
Latest epidemiological updates
Global epidemiology
Resolutions and decisions
Eradication of dracunculiasis, 2011
| WHA64.16
Eradication of dracunculiasis, 2004
| WHA57.9
Eradication of dracunculiasis, 1997
| WHA50.35
Eradication of dracunculiasis, 1991
| WHA44.5
International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, 1989
| WHA42.25
Elimination of dracunculiasis, 1989
| WHA42.29
Elimination of dracunculiasis, 1986
| WHA39.21
International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, 1981
| WHA34.25
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
News
All →
26 May 2025
Departmental update
Progress for NTDs: two resolutions adopted at WHA78
30 January 2025
Departmental update
Communities mobilize to end Guinea-worm disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
31 December 2024
Departmental update
A tribute to President Jimmy Carter
Calls
6 October 2023
Call for consultation
Call for public consultation  ̶  Target Product Profile for diagnostic test to detect D. medinensis infection in animals and Target Product Profile for diagnostic test to detect D. medinensis presence in environmental samples
Publications
All →
16 May 2025
Dracunculiasis eradication: global surveillance summary, 2024
Weekly epidemiological record
Download
Read More
1 March 2025
Dracunculus: background document for the WHO guidelines for drinking-water quality
There is strong evidence linking transmission of Dracunculus medinensis to unsafe drinking water. In the 1980s dracunculiasis, also known as guinea-worm...
Download
Read More
17 May 2024
Dracunculiasis eradication: global surveillance summary, 2023
In accordance with the recommendations
of the International Commission for the
Certification of Dracunculiasis Eradication (ICCDE), WHO has certified...
Download
Read More
Our work
Certifying eradication of dracunculiasis
Implementing dracunculiasis surveillance and control
Eradicating dracunculiasis
10 facts on Dracunculiasis
4 November 2019
Dracunculiasis (Guinea-worm disease)
Events
16 – 17 September 2024
International high-level meeting on dracunculiasis eradication
Multimedia
Infographic
Eradicating guinea-worm disease
10 June 2016
WHA 69: Two diseases, one target
11 May 2016
WHO: Dracunculiasis eradication
Related links
More information
WHO Collaborating Center
Peer-reviewed publications
Results (PubMed) for
dracunculiasis
or
Guinea worm
Contact
Dr Dieudonné Sankara
Medical officer
sankarad@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Human African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness)
Diseases and conditions
Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis)