Universal Health Coverage
Skip to main content
Overview
Universal health coverage (UHC) means that all people have
access to the full range of quality health services they need, when and where
they need them, without financial hardship. It covers the full continuum of
essential health services, from health promotion to prevention, treatment,
rehabilitation and palliative care.
To deliver on this promise, countries need to have strong, efficient
and equitable health systems that are rooted in the communities they serve.
Primary health care (PHC) is the most effective and cost-efficient way to get
there. Every country has a different path to achieving UHC and to decide what
to cover based on the needs of their populations and the resources at hand.
Investing in PHC ensures that all those needs are identified, prioritized and
addressed in an integrated way; that there is a robust and equipped health and
care workforce; and that all sectors of society contribute to confronting the
environmental and socio-economic factors that affect health and well-being,
including preparing for, responding to and recovering from emergencies.
WHO response
As a foundation for UHC, WHO recommends reorienting health
systems using a primary health care (PHC) approach. Achieving UHC is a WHO
strategic priority, with the goal of 1 billion more people benefitting from
universal health coverage by 2025.
In countries with fragile health systems, we focus on technical
assistance to build national institutions and service delivery to fill critical
gaps in emergencies. In more robust health system settings, we drive public
health impact towards health coverage for all through policy dialogue for the
systems of the future and strategic support to improve performance.
This work is supported by normative guidance and agreements;
data, research and innovation; and leadership in the realms of diplomacy,
advocacy, gender equality, health equity and human rights, multisectoral
action, and finance.
2030 Agenda for SDGs
WHO’s work is aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDG) target 3.8, which focuses on achieving universal health coverage,
including financial risk protection, access to quality essential health-care
services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential
medicines and vaccines for all.
Globally, progress towards universal health coverage is a
challenge. Progress in service coverage has stalled while the proportion of the
population facing catastrophic out-of-pocket health spending increases
continuously.
WHO monitors progress and publishes global reports to reveal the
latest evidence every two years. See the reports here and visit the
UHC
fact sheet
for more information.
Fact sheets
Primary health care
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Databases and tools
Triple Billion Dashboard
UHC data platform
Resolutions and decisions
Primary health care
Community health workers delivering primary health care: opportunities and challenges
UNGA 74/2 Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, 2019
UNGA 78/4 Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, 2023
Global action on patient safety
2020: International Year of the Nurse and the Midwife
Technical work
Access to Medicines and Health Products
Health Systems Governance and Financing
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
News
All →
5 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO at the 151st IPU Assembly: advancing health, rights and resilience through parliamentary action
23 September 2025
News release
Uncontrolled high blood pressure puts over a billion people at risk
22 September 2025
Joint News Release
EU renews support for WHO’s Universal Health Coverage Partnership
8 August 2025
Departmental update
WHO calls for parliamentary leadership on health at the Sixth World Conference of Speakers of Parliament
Our work
UN High-level Meetings on Universal Health Coverage
Enabling diverse voices and meaningful engagement of older people
Transforming health and social services towards a more person-centred and integrated care
Accessing essential health services in fragile, conflict-affected and vulnerable settings
Assessing country progress in health financing for UHC
Improving service access and quality
Addressing the political economy of health financing reform
Working with parliamentarians to achieve UHC
Strengthening legal frameworks for UHC
Universal Health Coverage Day campaign
12 December
Universal Health Coverage Partnership
Bringing WHO’s technical expertise to over 125 countries to foster policy dialogue for UHC, support national health planning and strengthen health systems.
UHC2030
UHC2030 provides a global platform for multiple stakeholders to mobilize political commitment and collective action for UHC.
Feature stories
All →
16 May 2025
Finding a path to language justice in sexual and reproductive health and rights
4 April 2025
Fatima: crossing deserts to protect mothers and newborns in Pakistan
7 March 2025
UHC-Partnership: Nigerians in Imo State are protected from financial hardship when accessing health services
26 February 2025
UHC-Partnership: Namibia tackles antimicrobial resistance
Events
All →
Universal Health Coverage (UHC) High-level Forum
6 December 2025
Solution Session on home and community-based long-term care for older people at the Second World Summit for Social Development
4 November 2025 13:00 – 14:30 CET
Seventh International Conference on Family Planning
3 – 6 November 2025
International Safe Abortion Day 2025
28 September 2025
Publications
All →
14 October 2025
Monitoring progress on universal health coverage and the health-related Sustainable...
Progress on the decade for strengthening the role of the health sector for improving civil registration and vital statistics in the South-East Asia Region...
Download
Read More
13 October 2025
Abortion care guideline: executive summary, 2nd ed.
The objective of this guideline is to present the complete set of all WHO recommendations and best practice statements relating to abortion. While...
Download
Read More
8 October 2025
Report of the fourth Life Course Network meeting, 18-19 November 2024 - Extending healthy ageing across...
World Health Organization (WHO)’s work on the life course – connecting optimal development and healthy ageing – aims to extend learning...
Download
Read More
Multimedias
All →
7 March 2025
Ensuring kangaroo mother care for every small or preterm baby
12 December 2024
Universal Health Coverage Day: WHO Director-General’s message
6 December 2024
Primary Health Care: The WHO PHC Country Case Study Compendium
6 December 2024
Implementing the primary health care approach: a primer - WHO's report
Related health topics
Health systems
Financial protection
Health systems
Health Laws
Health interventions
Medicines
Health systems
Quality of care
Health systems
Health financing
Health systems
Health systems governance
Health systems
Primary health care
Socio-political determinants
Social determinants of health