Abuse of older people
Skip to main content
Overview
The abuse of older people, also known as elder abuse, is an intentional act, or failure to act, by a caregiver or another person in a relationship involving an expectation of trust that causes harm to an adult 60 years and older.
Around 1 in 6 people 60 years and older experienced some form of abuse in community settings during the past year. Rates in institutional settings, such as nursing homes and long-term care facilities, are higher still, with 2 in 3 staff reporting that they have committed abuse in the past year. Even if rates remain constant, the absolute number of older people experiencing abuse is predicted to increase as the global population of older people increases. Abuse of older people can lead to serious physical injuries and long-term psychological consequences, increased risk of nursing home placement, use of emergency services, hospitalization and premature death.
Promising strategies to prevent and respond to abuse of older people include caregiver interventions, which provide services to relieve the burden of caregiving; money management programmes for older adults vulnerable to financial exploitation; helplines and emergency shelters; and multi-disciplinary teams, as the responses required often cut across many systems, including, for instance, criminal justice, health care, mental health care, adults protective services and long-term care.
Prevention
Many strategies have been implemented to prevent abuse of older people, take action against it and mitigate its consequences. Interventions that have been implemented – mainly in high-income countries – to prevent abuse include:
public and professional awareness campaigns
screening (of potential victims and abusers)
school-based intergenerational programmes
caregiver support interventions (including      stress management and respite care)
residential care policies to define and      improve standards of care
caregiver training on dementia
money management programmes
multidisciplinary teams.
Efforts to respond to and prevent further abuse include interventions such as:
mandatory reporting of abuse to authorities
self-help groups
safe-houses and emergency shelters
psychological programmes for abusers
helplines to provide information and referrals
caregiver support interventions.
WHO response
On 15 June 2022, World Elder Abuse Awareness Day, WHO and partners published “
Tackling abuse of older people: five priorities for the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021–2030)
”. The
United Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing 2021–2030
is a unique chance for a step change in the way abuse of older people is tackled.
It offers an opportunity to address abuse of older people in a more concerted, sustained and coordinated way and to reduce the number of older people worldwide who experience abuse. This document outlines five priorities, arrived at through wide consultation,
to prevent and respond to abuse of older people, which are:
combatting ageism;
generating more and better data on prevalence and risk and on protective factors;
developing and scaling up cost–effective solutions for abuse of older people;
making an investment case for addressing the issue; and
raising funds for tackling abuse of older people.
WHO’s response to abuse of older people will also be organized according to these five priorities. If governments, UN agencies and development organizations, civil society organizations, academic and research institutions and funders implement these
priorities we can finally start to prevent abuse of older people globally and contribute to improving their health, well-being and dignity.
Fact sheets
Abuse of older people
Databases and tools
Violence Info
UN Decade of Healthy Ageing database of promising interventions to prevent and respond to abuse of older people
Initiatives and groups
Violence Prevention Alliance
UN Decade of Healthy Ageing Intervention Accelerator to prevent and respond to abuse of older people
Technical work
Social determinants of health
News
All →
29 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO and Noora Health begin collaboration to strengthen support for family caregivers
30 June 2025
News release
Social connection linked to improved health and reduced risk of early death
26 June 2025
Departmental update
Helping people live well at all ages
4 December 2024
Departmental update
Clinical consortium on healthy ageing meeting, 2024
Publications
All →
15 June 2022
Tackling abuse of older people: five priorities for the United Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing (‎2021–2030)‎
Globally 1 in 6 people aged 60 years and older experience abuse in the community every year. Rates in institutions are even higher. Yet, abuse of older...
Download
Read More
18 June 2020
Addressing violence against children, women and older people during the covid-19 pandemic: Key actions
Several countries affected by COVID-19, have seen increases in levels of violence occurring in the home, including violence against children, intimate...
Download
Read More
2 January 2017
Global strategy and action plan on ageing and health
The Strategy is a significant step forward in establishing a framework for Member States, the WHO Secretariat and partners to contribute to achieving the...
Download
Read More
2 January 2017
Global strategy and action plan on ageing and health-summary
For the first time in history, most people can expect to live into their
60s and beyond. By 2050, 1 in 5 people will be 60 years or older.
A longer life...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
All →
Infographic
Abuse of older people: a hidden problem - UN Decade of Healthy Ageing
Infographic
Elder abuse has devastating consequences
Infographic
Elder abuse is preventable
Infographic
What are the risk factors for committing elder abuse?
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Ageing
Populations and demographics
Disability
Health interventions
Rehabilitation