Child growth
Skip to main content
Overview
Child malnutrition is a major public health issue worldwide. An
estimated 144 million children under age 5 are stunted, 47 million are wasted
and 38.3 million have overweight or obesity. Around 45% of deaths among
children under 5 years of age are linked to undernutrition.
Measuring the growth of infants and children is an important part of child
health surveillance. Inadequate infant growth due to poor nutrition leads to
under-nutrition in children in many low- and middle-income countries, which, if
followed later in life by an increased intake of calories, can result in
overweight or obesity.
The WHO
Child Growth
Standards are a diagnostic
tool used to monitor and assess the nutritional status of infants and young
children worldwide. By tracking children’s height and body weight, the
standards detect children or populations not growing properly, or who are underweight
or at risk of overweight, and who may require specific health services or
public health responses.
The WHO Child Growth Standards have charts for boys and girls separated,
covering age birth to 5 years. They are used in doctors’ offices, clinics and
other health facilities, and by research institutions, child health advocacy
organizations and ministries of health
Learn about Nutrition and Food Safety and COVID-19
Impact
Child stunting refers to a child who is too short for his or her age and is
the result of chronic or recurrent malnutrition. Stunting is a contributing
risk factor to child mortality and is also a marker of inequalities in human
development. Child overweight refers to a child who is too heavy for his or her
height. This form of malnutrition usually results from expending too few calories
for the amount of food consumed or from endocrine disbalances, and it increases
the risk of noncommunicable diseases later in life. Child wasting refers to a
child who is too thin for his or her height and is the result of recent rapid
weight loss or the failure to gain weight. A child who is moderately or
severely wasted has an increased risk of death, but treatment is possible.
Childhood wasting and overweight are both forms of malnutrition and can
coexist in a population. In 2020, wasting (low weight for height) and
overweight was found in 6.7% of children under 5 (45.4 million) and 5.7% of
children under 5 (38.9 million), respectively.
Prevention
In 2020, 22% of children under age 5 worldwide (149.2 million) suffered from
stunting, a decline from 24.4% in 2015. To achieve the target of a 50%
reduction in the number of stunted children by 2030, the annual rate of decline
must double (to 3.9% per year) from its current annual reduction rate of 2.1%
per year.
Although malnutrition can manifest in multiple ways, the path to prevention
is virtually identical: adequate maternal nutrition before and during pregnancy
and while breastfeeding; optimal breastfeeding in the first two years of life;
nutritious, diverse and safe complementary foods in early childhood; and a
healthy environment, including access to basic health, water, hygiene and
sanitation services and opportunities for safe physical activity.
Many of these vital pathways to good nutrition are under threat – including
due to the COVID-19 pandemic – and have the potential to undermine progress
towards ending malnutrition in all its forms. As the world responds to and
recovers from the pandemic, urgent action is critical to protect maternal and
child nutrition – especially in the most affected regions – and secure a future
where the right to nutrition is a reality for every child.
Fact sheets
Infant and young child feeding
Malnutrition
Newborns: improving survival and well-being
Healthy diet
Obesity and overweight
Questions and answers
Questions and answers: Child growth standards
Up to what age can a baby stay well nourished by just being breastfed?
What is the recommended food for children in their very early years?
Why can’t we give water to a breastfeeding baby before the 6 months, even when it is hot?
Databases and tools
Child Growth Standards
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions (eLENA)
Growth reference data for 5-19 years
Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition
Global Nutrition Targets Tracking Tool
UNICEF/WHO/WB Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates (JME)
Resolutions and decisions
WHA71.9 Infant and young child feeding
WHA69.8 United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025)
WHA 69.9 Ending inappropriate promotion of foods for infants and young child
EB105/INF.Doc./ Implementation of resolutions and decisions: infant and young child nutrition: the WHO multicentre growth reference study
Technical work
Nutrition and Food Safety
News
All →
22 August 2025
Joint News Release
Famine confirmed for first time in Gaza
29 July 2025
Note for Media
IPC Gaza Strip Food Insecurity and Malnutrition Alert
27 July 2025
News release
Malnutrition rates reach alarming levels in Gaza, WHO warns
27 May 2025
Departmental update
World Health Assembly re-commits to global nutrition targets and marketing regulations
Our work
Measuring child growth through data
Promoting baby-friendly hospitals
Events
All 	→
Launch of WHO guideline on fortification of edible oils and fats with vitamins A and D for public health
17 November 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
Announcing the Joint UN Initiative for the Prevention of Wasting (JUNIPr)
11 March 2025 14:00 – 15:30 CET
Accelerating childhood overweight reduction: lessons learned and the path towards 2030
21 November 2024 15:00 – 16:30 CET
Publications
All 	→
24 October 2025
WHO guideline on fortification of edible oils and fats with vitamins A and D for public health
Vitamin A deficiency remains a leading cause of preventable blindness in children and also increases the risks of severe illness or death from infections....
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: topical briefs on maternal, infant and young child nutrition
Recognizing that the world is not on track to meet all of the 2025 global nutrition targets, WHO Member States, during the 78th World Health Assembly in...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: child wasting brief
Wasting, or being too thin for one’s age, is defined as a weight-for-height that is more than two standard deviations below the World Health Organization...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: low birth weight brief
Low birth weight is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as weight at birth less than 2500 g (5.5 lb). Low birth weight continues to be a significant...
Download
Read More
Training
1 December 2008
WHO child growth standards: training course on child growth assessment
The Training Course on Child Growth Assessment is a tool for the application of the WHO Child Growth Standards. It is intended primarily for health care...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All 	→
Infographic
Nutrition ferritin - where iron needs increase
Infographic
The double burden of malnutrition - WHERE
Infographic
Essential nutrition actions (ENA) - Children
Infographic
Double burden of malnutrition
Videos
All →
4 March 2024
WHO's department of nutrition and food safety: key achievements 2023
8 January 2020
Promoting healthy growth and preventing childhood stunting
31 October 2019
Child health and development: IMCI Training – Assess breastfeeding
31 October 2019
Child health and development: IMCI Training – Assess very severe disease
Related health topics
Health interventions
Complementary feeding
Health interventions
Infant nutrition
Diseases and conditions
Malnutrition
Human behaviour
Nutrition