Health promoting schools
Skip to main content
Overview
A health promoting school is one that constantly strengthens its capacity as a healthy setting for living, learning and working.
A health promoting
school:
Fosters health and learning with all the measures at its disposal.
Engages health and education officials, teachers, teachers' unions, students, parents, health providers and community leaders in efforts to make the school a healthy place.
Strives to provide a healthy environment, school health education, and school health services along with school/community projects and outreach, health promotion programmes for staff, nutrition and food safety programmes, opportunities for physical education and recreation, and programmes for counselling, social support and mental health promotion.
Implements policies and practices that respect an individual's wellbeing and dignity, provide multiple opportunities for success, and acknowledge good efforts and intentions as well as personal achievements.
Strives to improve the health of school personnel, families and community members as well as pupils; and works with community leaders to help them understand how the community contributes to, or undermines, health and education.
Focus
Health promoting schools
focus on:
Caring for oneself and others.
Making healthy decisions and taking control over life's circumstances.
Creating conditions that are conducive to health (through policies, services, physical/social conditions).
Building capacities for peace, shelter, education, food, income, a stable ecosystem, equity, social justice, sustainable development.
Preventing leading causes of death, disease and disability: helminths, tobacco use, HIV/AIDS/STDs, sedentary lifestyle, drugs and alcohol, violence and injuries, unhealthy nutrition.
Influencing health-related behaviours: knowledge, beliefs, skills, attitudes, values, support.
An effective school health programme can be one of the most cost effective investments a nation can make to simultaneously improve education and health. WHO promotes school health programmes as a strategic means to prevent important health risks among youth and to engage the education sector in efforts to change the educational, social, economic and political conditions that affect risk.
Background
WHO's Global School Health Initiative, launched in 1995, seeks to mobilize and strengthen health promotion and education activities at the local, national, regional and global levels. The Initiative is designed to improve the health of students, school personnel, families and other members of the community through schools.
The goal of WHO's Global School Health Initiative is to increase the number of schools that can truly be called "Health-Promoting Schools". Although definitions will vary, depending on need and circumstance, a Health-Promoting School can be characterized as a school constantly strengthening its capacity as a healthy setting for living, learning and working.
The general direction of WHO's Global School Health Initiative is guided by the Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion (1986); the Jakarta Declaration of the Fourth International Conference on Health Promotion (1997); and the WHO's Expert Committee Recommendation on Comprehensive School Health Education and Promotion (1995).
Fact sheets
Health literacy
Resolutions and decisions
Contributing to social and economic development: sustainable action across sectors to improve health and health equity. (WHA 67.12)
Reducing health inequities through action on the social determinants of health (WHA 62.14)
Technical work
Health Promotion
News
All 	→
27 May 2024
News release
Launch of the Group of Friends of the WHO Academy on the sidelines of the World Health Assembly
25 January 2024
Departmental update
WHO releases a web version of the second edition of its Global Accelerated Action for the Health of Adolescents (AA-HA!) guidance
11 October 2023
Departmental update
WHO releases updated guidance on adolescent health and well-being
22 June 2021
News release
UNESCO and WHO urge countries to make every school a health-promoting school
Latest publications
All 	→
2 April 2025
Antimicrobial resistance prevention and education in schools: a brief for education policy-makers and...
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) poses a threat to global health, food security and achieving the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Tackling AMR...
Download
Read More
9 October 2024
Mental health of children and young people: service guidance
Mental health conditions are prevalent and often develop early in life. Yet very few of the world’s children and young people receive the mental...
Download
Read More
4 October 2024
Legal considerations for health emergency measures in schools and education
During the COVID-19 pandemic, countries took an unprecedented number of health emergency measures at the national and subnational levels to protect health...
Download
Read More
3 October 2024
How school systems can improve health and well-being: topic brief: sexual and reproductive health
This topic brief highlights how promoting sexual and reproductive health supports the achievement of education and learning objectives, and explains...
Download
Read More
Our work
All 	→
Investing in school health
Events
All 	→
Webinar: demonstration session of the global platform to monitor school health
12 December 2023 15:00 – 17:00 UTC Time
Making every school a health-promoting school
22 June 2021 13:00 – 14:30 UTC Time
Webinar: Global Standards for Health Promoting Schools
16 February 2021 13:00 – 15:00 UTC Time
Videos
All →
30 June 2023
Make Every School a Health-Promoting School: a call by WHO's Director-General, Dr Tedros
21 June 2021
Making every school a health-promoting school
30 October 2018
Dr Tedros official message for the launch of the UNESCO chair Global Health & Education event
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Adolescent health
Populations and demographics
Child health
Behavioural interventions
Health promotion
Human behaviour
Nutrition
Conditions
Obesity
Human behaviour
Physical activity