Pertussis
Skip to main content
Overview
Pertussis, also known as whooping cough, is a highly contagious respiratory infection caused by the bacterium
Bordetella pertussis.
In 2018, there were more than 151 000 cases of pertussis globally.
Pertussis spreads easily from person to person mainly through droplets produced by coughing or sneezing. The disease is most dangerous in infants, and is a significant cause of disease and death in this age group.
The first symptoms generally appear 7 to 10 days after infection. They include a mild fever, runny nose and cough, which in typical cases gradually develops into a hacking cough followed by whooping (hence the common name of whooping cough). Pneumonia is a relatively common complication, and seizures and brain disease occur rarely.
People with pertussis are most contagious up to about 3 weeks after the cough begins, and many children who contract the infection have coughing spells that last 4 to 8 weeks. Antibiotics are used to treat the infection.
Prevention
The best way to prevent pertussis is through immunization. The three-dose primary series diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP3) (- containing) vaccines decrease the risk of severe pertussis in infancy. In 2018, 86% of the global target population had received the recommended three doses of DTP-containing vaccine during infancy.
WHO recommends the first dose be administered as early as 6 weeks of age; with subsequent doses given 4-8 weeks apart, at age 10-14 weeks and 14-18 weeks. A booster dose is recommended, preferably during the second year of life. Based on local epidemiology, further booster doses may be warranted later in life.
Vaccination of pregnant women is effective in preventing disease in infants too young to be vaccinated. National programmes may consider vaccination of pregnant women with pertussis-containing vaccine as a strategy additional to routine primary infant pertussis vaccination in countries or settings with high or increasing infant morbidity/mortality from pertussis.
Fact sheets
Immunization coverage
Pneumonia in children
Questions and answers
Questions and answers on vaccines
Databases and tools
GHO: Diphtheria tetanus toxoid and pertussis (DTP3) coverage estimates
GHO: Pertussis whooping cough - number of cases
Global vaccine action plan indicator portal
Resolutions and decisions
WHA71 Global vaccine action plan Report by the Director-General
WHA70.14 Strengthening immunization to achieve the goals of the Global vaccine action plan
WHA68.6 Global vaccine action plan
Technical work
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
News
15 July 2025
Joint News Release
Global childhood vaccination coverage holds steady, yet over 14 million infants remain unvaccinated – WHO, UNICEF
10 December 2019
News release
Release of the Global Vaccine Action Plan review and lessons learned report
Multimedia
7 January 2020
As vaccination has increased, diseases have decreased
Latest publications
All →
26 November 2023
Immunization program data: regional and country profiles 2022
This publication includes regional and national trends on vaccine-preventable disease cases and immunization coverage in the Western Pacific Region as...
Download
Read More
7 January 2020
Laboratory manual for the diagnosis of whooping cough caused by Bordetella pertussis-Bordetella parapertussis....
Whooping cough is a worldwide infectious disease caused by the bacteria Bordetella
pertussis and Bordetella parapertussis. It is a respiratory disease...
Download
Read More
4 December 2019
Global Vaccine Action Plan and Decade of Vaccines Review and lessons learned reports
The catalyst for GVAP was the call by Bill and
Melinda Gates at the 2010 World Economic Forum
for the next decade to be the ‘Decade of Vaccines’.
Following...
Download
Read More
25 April 2018
South-East Asia regional vaccine action plan 2016-2020
A good plan is vital to success. As the following pages demonstrate, the WHO South-East Asia Region is well-poised to build on its significant achievements...
Download
Read More
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Child health
Populations and demographics
Newborn health
Campaigns
World Immunization Week