Anaemia
Skip to main content
Overview
Anaemia is a condition in which the number of red blood cells or the haemoglobin concentration within them is lower than normal. Haemoglobin is needed to carry oxygen and if you have too few or abnormal red blood cells, or not enough haemoglobin, there will be a decreased capacity of the blood to carry oxygen to the body’s tissues. This results in symptoms such as fatigue, weakness, dizziness and shortness of breath, among others. The optimal haemoglobin concentration required to meet physiologic needs varies by age, sex, elevation of residence, smoking habits and pregnancy status.  Anaemia may be caused by several factors: nutrient deficiencies through inadequate diets or inadequate absorption of nutrients, infections (e.g. malaria, parasitic infections, tuberculosis, HIV), inflammation, chronic diseases, gynaecological and obstetric conditions, and inherited red blood cell disorders. The most common nutritional cause of anaemia is iron deficiency, although deficiencies in folate, vitamins B12 and A are also important causes.
Anaemia is a serious global public health problem that particularly affects young children, menstruating adolescent girls and women, and pregnant and postpartum women. WHO estimates that 40% of children 6–59 months of age, 37% of pregnant women, and 30% of women 15–49 years of age worldwide are anaemic.
Symptoms
Anaemia can cause a range of non-specific symptoms including tiredness, weakness, dizziness or light-headedness, drowsiness, and shortness of breath, especially upon exertion. Children and pregnant women are especially vulnerable, with more severe cases of anaemia leading to an increased risk of maternal and child mortality. Iron deficiency anaemia has also been shown to affect cognitive and physical development in children and reduce productivity in adults.
Anaemia is an indicator of both poor nutrition and poor health. It is problematic on its own, but it can also impact other global public health concerns such as stunting and wasting, low birth weight and childhood overweight and obesity due to lack of energy to exercise. School performance in children and reduced work productivity in adults due to anaemia can have further social and economic impacts for the individual and family.
WHO response
Accurate characterization of anaemia is critical to understand the burden and epidemiology of this problem, for planning public health interventions, and for clinical care of people across the life course. While iron deficiency anaemia is the most common form and can often be treated through dietary changes, other forms of anaemia must be treated by addressing underlying infections and chronic conditions requiring comprehensive health interventions.
WHO has guidance that covers all WHO Regions to help reduce the prevalence of anaemia through prevention and treatment. These guidelines aim to increase dietary diversity, improve infant feeding practices and improve the bioavailability and intake of micronutrients through fortification or supplementation with iron, folic acid and other vitamins and mineral. Social and behaviour change communication strategies are used to change nutrition-related behaviours. Interventions to address the underlying and basic causes of anaemia look at issues such as disease control, water, sanitation and hygiene, reproductive health and root causes such as poverty, lack of education and gender norms.
Anaemia, as a public health issue, needs to be addressed from multiple perspectives and through multiple coordinated efforts, including multiple government sectors, nongovernmental organizations, United Nations agencies and the private sector – each with specific and complementary roles to collectively achieve anaemia reduction and improve health and well-being.
See
here
for more information.
Fact sheets
Anaemia
Malnutrition
Healthy diet
Malaria
Soil-transmitted helminth infections
Databases and tools
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions (eLENA)
Prevalence of anaemia in women
Prevalence of anaemia in children <5 years
Global Nutrition Targets Tracking Tool
WHO Micronutrients Database
Vitamin and Mineral Nutrition Information System (VMNIS)
Global anaemia reduction efforts in women of reproductive age
Nutritional anaemias: Tools for effective prevention and control
Initiatives and groups
Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent health and nutrition (STAGE)
Resolutions and decisions
WHA69.8 United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (‎2016–2025)
WHA65.6 Comprehensive Implementation Plan on Maternal, Infant and Young Child Nutrition and global nutrition targets
EB152(13) Accelerating efforts for preventing micronutrient deficiencies and their consequences, including spina bifida and other neural tube defects, through safe and effective food fortification
Technical work
Nutrition and Food Safety
Global Malaria Programme
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Ageing
News
All →
13 February 2025
Departmental update
Combatting anaemia through improved measurement, diagnosis and reporting
29 May 2023
Departmental update
New WHA resolution to accelerate efforts on food micronutrient fortification
12 May 2023
Departmental update
WHO calls for accelerated action to reduce anaemia
5 July 2022
Departmental update
Launch of the COVID-19 impact on nutrition Analytical Framework
Publications
All →
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: topical briefs on maternal, infant and young child nutrition
Recognizing that the world is not on track to meet all of the 2025 global nutrition targets, WHO Member States, during the 78th World Health Assembly in...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: anaemia brief
Anaemia impairs health and well-being in women and increases the risk of maternal and neonatal adverse outcomes. The determinants of anaemia are multi-faceted...
Download
Read More
15 August 2025
WHO global anaemia estimates: key findings, 2025
The brief on key findings from the 2025 edition of the WHO anaemia estimates provides a snapshot of the current status of anaemia among women aged 15–49...
Download
Read More
5 March 2024
Guideline on haemoglobin cutoffs to define anaemia in individuals and populations
Appropriate guidelines for measuring haemoglobin and defining anaemia are crucial for both clinical and public health medicine but require consideration...
Download
Read More
Events
All →
Accelerating anaemia reduction: a global health priority for 2030
19 November 2024 15:00 – 16:30 CET
Webinar series - Accelerating Progress for 2025 and Beyond: Improving nutrition through bold action in health, food and social protection systems
18 – 21 November 2024
Webinar: Evidence to practice – aligning anaemia reduction efforts in Africa
19 July 2024 15:00 – 16:30 CET
Documents
All →
21 October 2025
Spreadsheets for WHO reference protocol for measuring fatty acids in foods, with...
Spreadsheet for WHO reference protocol for measuring fatty acids in foods, with emphasis on monitoring trans-fatty acids originating from partial hydrogenation...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
All →
4 March 2024
WHO's department of nutrition and food safety: key achievements 2023
Infographic
Global nutrition targets 2025 - anaemia
Commentary
19 May 2017
Double-duty actions for ending malnutrition within a decade
Feature story
30 May 2019
Tackling childhood anaemia in indigenous communities in Peru
Related health topics
Health and wellbeing
Child growth
Diseases and conditions
Malnutrition
Substances
Micronutrients
Human behaviour
Nutrition