Landslides
Skip to main content
Overview
Landslides are more widespread than any other geological event, and can occur anywhere in the world. They occur when large masses of soil, rocks or debris move down a slope due to a natural phenomenon or human activity. Mudslides or debris flows are also a common type of fast-moving landslide.
Landslides can accompany heavy rains or follow droughts, earthquakes or volcanic eruptions. Areas most vulnerable to landslides include:
steep terrain, including areas at the bottom of canyons;
land previously burned by wildfires;
land that has been modified due to human activity, such as deforestation or construction;
channels along a stream or river;
any area were surface runoff is directed or land is heavily saturated.
Between 1998-2017, landslides affected an estimated 4.8 million people and cause more than 18 000 deaths. Climate change and rising temperatures are expected to trigger more landslides, especially in mountainous areas with snow and ice. As permafrost melts, rocky slopes can become more unstable resulting in a landslide.
Impact
Landslides can cause high mortality and injuries from rapidly flowing water and debris. The most common cause of death in a landslide is trauma or suffocation by entrapment.
Broken power, water, gas or sewage pipes can also result in injury or illness in the population affected, such as water-borne diseases, electrocution or lacerations from falling debris. People affected by landslides can also have short- and long-term mental health effects due to loss of family, property, livestock or crops.
Landslides can also greatly impact the health system and essential services, such as water, electricity or communication lines.
WHO Response
The magnitude of the physical and human costs from landslides can be reduced if adequate emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery measures are implemented in a sustainable and timely manner.
WHO works with Member States to build resilient and proactive health systems that can anticipate the needs and challenges during emergencies so that they are more likely to reduce risks and respond effectively when needed.
As the health cluster lead for global emergencies, WHO works with partners to respond to:
ensure appropriate food supplementation;
restore primary care services, like immunization, child and maternal health, and mental health;
assemble mobile health teams and outreach;
conduct epidemic surveillance, early warning and response;
call for emergency funding to support health action.
Fact sheets
Climate change
Mental health in emergencies
Drowning
Questions and answers
WHO's role in Humanitarian Health Action
What is WHO's role in emergencies?
Databases and tools
Disaster statistics - UNDRR
Disease outbreak news
Latest disease outbreak news
Technical work
Health Emergencies Programme
Climate Change
News
All →
16 July 2019
News release
WHO supports relief efforts in flood affected areas
8 May 2018
News release
Looming monsoons and little funding threaten health gains in Cox’s Bazar
21 September 2017
News release
Mitigating health risks in the wake of disaster
Publications
All →
30 January 2024
Floods: four tips to reduce food safety risks
After a flood, food that has been in contact with flood-water may have become unsafe for human consumption. These flyers include tips to reduce food safety...
Download
Read More
29 April 2020
Preparedness for cyclones, tropical storms, tornadoes, floods and earthquakes during the COVID-19 pandemic
The
WHO health advisory provides guidance to countries on adapting all existing
preparedness and response plans and procedures for natural hazards such...
Download
Read More
10 January 2018
Communicating risk in public health emergencies: a WHO guideline for emergency risk communication (‎ERC)‎...
Recent public health emergencies, such as the Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa (2014–2015), the emergence of the Zika virus syndrome in...
Download
Read More
1 January 2018
Chemical releases associated with floods
This leaflet provides brief information about Natech and other
chemical releases caused directly or indirectly by floods. It is an
extract from the WHO...
Download
Read More
Our work
Managing environmental health risks in emergencies
Related links
Training: Incident Management System (Tier 1)
Training: Incident Management System (Tier 2)
Training: Risk Communication Essentials
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 – 2030
WHO Health Cluster
PAHO: What to do in a storm
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Health tips after floods
Infographic
Health tips after typhoons
Infographic
Health tips after hurricanes
Related health topics
Disasters
Climate change
Disasters
Drought
Disasters
Earthquakes
Disasters
Floods