Avian and other zoonotic influenza
Skip to main content
Overview
Animal influenza viruses are distinct from human seasonal influenza viruses and do not easily transmit between humans. However, zoonotic influenza viruses - animal influenza viruses that may occasionally infect humans through direct or indirect contact - can cause disease in humans ranging from a mild illness to death.
Birds are the natural hosts for
avian influenza viruses
. After an outbreak of A(H5N1) virus in 1997 in poultry in Hong Kong SAR, China, since 2003, this avian and other influenza viruses have spread from Asia to Europe and Africa. In 2013, human infections with the influenza A(H7N9) virus were reported in China.
Most
swine influenza viruses
do not cause disease in humans, but some countries have reported cases of human infection from certain swine influenza viruses. Close proximity to infected pigs or visiting locations where pigs are exhibited has been reported for most human cases, but some limited human-to-human transmission has occurred.
Just like birds and pigs, other animals such as horses and dogs, can be infected with their own influenza viruses (canine influenza viruses, equine influenza viruses, etc.).
Symptoms
Avian, swine and other zoonotic influenza infections in humans may cause disease ranging from mild upper respiratory infection (fever and cough) to rapid progression to severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, shock and even death.
Gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting and diarrhea has been reported more frequently in A(H5N1) infection. Conjunctivitis has also been reported in influenza A(H7).
Disease features such as the incubation period, severity of symptoms and clinical outcome varies by the virus causing infection but mainly manifests with respiratory symptoms.
Treatment
Evidence suggests that some
antiviral drugs
, notably
neuraminidase inhibitor
(oseltamivir, zanamivir), can reduce the duration of viral replication and improve prospects of survival, however ongoing clinical studies are needed. Emergence of oseltamivir resistance has been reported.
Fact sheets
Influenza (avian and other zoonotic)
Questions and answers
Frequently asked questions on avian influenza
Frequently asked questions on H5N1 influenza
Databases and tools
Global influenza virological surveillance (in the Global Health Observatory)
GHO Map gallery on avian influenza
Initiatives and groups
Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework (PIP)
Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS)
Resolutions and decisions
Pandemic influenza preparedness: sharing of influenza viruses and access to vaccines and other benefits (WHA64.5)
Technical work
Global Influenza Programme (GIP)
News
All →
25 March 2025
Departmental update
Despite global influenza vaccine production remaining steady, production and distribution challenges remain
25 March 2025
Departmental update
Influenza surveillance in conflict-affected areas of Myanmar
25 March 2025
Departmental update
Enhancing respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) surveillance in Mongolia
16 October 2024
Departmental update
Pioneering regional collaboration to enhance regulatory practices in the Americas
Publications
All →
9 September 2025
Public health resource pack for countries experiencing outbreaks of influenza in animals: revised guidance
This resource pack was developed for the country offices of the World Health Organization and national Public Health institutions, as an overview of the...
Download
Read More
13 August 2025
Pandemic influenza severity assessment (‎PISA)‎: a WHO guide to assess the severity of influenza in seasonal...
The updated WHO pandemic influenza severity assessment (PISA) framework set out in this document
provides a systematic approach for interpreting data...
Download
Read More
23 June 2025
Considerations for use of avian influenza A(‎H5)‎ vaccines during the interpandemic and emergence periods:...
WHO conducted a virtual scientific expert consultation on A(H5) vaccines and vaccination. This report provides an overview of the landscape of A(H5) vaccines...
Download
Read More
11 April 2025
Surveillance for human infections with avian influenza A(‎H5)‎ viruses: objectives, case definitions,...
The overall objective of continual global surveillance for human infection with avian influenza A(H5) viruses is to detect and characterize any influenza...
Download
Read More
Feature story
All →
30 September 2025
Sri Lanka’s use of antivirals reduces the seasonal influenza burden
30 September 2025
New tools strengthen pandemic preparedness through Risk Communication Community Engagement and Infodemic Management (RCCE-IM)
30 September 2025
Tajikistan expands influenza vaccination to strengthen pandemic preparedness
30 September 2025
Vanuatu strengthens pandemic preparedness with a new national Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) strategy
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Protecting yourself from influenza
Infographic
Influenza high risk groups
Infographic
Vaccination protects you
Infographic
Vaccination protects health workers
Videos
All →
28 November 2024
WHO press conference on global health issues – 28 November 2024
1 November 2024
WHO press conference on global health issues – 1 November 2024
16 October 2024
WHO press conference on global health issues – 16 October 2024
11 July 2024
WHO press conference on global health issues with Dr Tedros – 11 July 2024
Events
All →
26 September 2025 09:00 – 12:00 Japan Time
WHO Information Meeting on the Composition of Influenza Virus Vaccines for Use in the 2026 Southern Hemisphere Influenza Season
Global Influenza Programme (GIP)
28 February 2025 09:00 – 12:00 GMT
WHO Information Meeting on the Composition of Influenza Virus Vaccines for Use in the 2025-2026 Northern Hemisphere Influenza Season
27 September 2024 09:00 – 12:00 AET
WHO Information Meeting on the Composition of Influenza Virus Vaccines for Use in the 2025 Southern Hemisphere Influenza Season
23 – 26 September 2024
WHO Consultation on the Composition of Influenza Virus Vaccines for Use in the 2025 Southern Hemisphere Influenza Season
Partnership
World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE)
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
Global early warning system for major animal diseases including zoonoses (GLEWS)
OIE/FAO Network of Expertise on Animal Influenza (OFFLU)
Related health topic
Diseases and conditions
Influenza (seasonal)