Trachoma
Skip to main content
Overview
Trachoma is a disease of the eye and the leading infectious cause of blindness worldwide. It is caused by an obligate intracellular bacterium called
Chlamydia trachomatis
. Infection is transmitted from person to person by direct or indirect transfer of ocular and nasal discharges of infected people; indirect transfer includes carriage on the body of species of flies. Preschool-age children harbour the principal reservoir of infection. Models suggest that an individual requires more than 150 lifetime infections to develop the blinding complications of trachoma.
Trachoma is endemic in some of the world’s poorest populations, who live in rural and remote areas and have highly inadequate access to water, sanitation and healthcare. Africa is the most affected continent, but it also has the most widespread control efforts. The disease is also found in Central and South America, Asia, Australia, and the Middle East. As of 19 March 2024, 18 countries had been validated as having eliminated trachoma as a public health problem. In 2022 alone, 129 224 people received surgical treatment for advanced trachoma, and 36.2 million were treated with antibiotics. Despite these successes, the disease remains a serious public health concern, with an estimated US$ 8 billion annual loss in productivity due to blindness and visual impairment.
Symptoms
Infection is associated with inflammatory changes in the conjunctiva known as “active trachoma”. An individual’s immune system can clear a single episode of infection, but in endemic communities, re-acquisition of the organism occurs frequently.
After years of
repeated episodes of active trachoma
, the inside of the eyelid can become so severely scarred (trachomatous conjunctival scarring) that it turns inwards and causes the eyelashes to rub against the eyeball (trachomatous trichiasis), resulting in constant pain and light intolerance; this and other alterations of the eye can lead to scarring of the cornea. Left untreated, this condition leads to the formation of irreversible opacities, with resulting visual impairment or blindness. The age at which this occurs depends on several factors including local transmission intensity. In very highly endemic communities, it can occur in childhood, though onset of visual impairment between the ages of 30 and 40 years is more typical.
Women are blinded up to four times as often as men, probably due to more frequent contact with infected children.
Individuals living in the poorest and most remote communities of Africa, Asia, Australia, the Middle East, Central and South America and the Pacific Islands are at risk.
Treatment
Trachoma can be prevented by limiting environmental risk factors. These include inadequate hygiene, crowded households, inadequate access to water and inadequate access to and use of sanitation. Infections usually begin at an early age and grow less frequent
and shorter in duration with increasing age. Infections are most often acquired through family and contact with others with active disease. Repeated infections cause the most serious symptoms of the disease.
Trachoma can be eliminated as a public health problem using the SAFE strategy, comprising:
S
urgery to treat trachomatous trichiasis, the blinding stage of the disease;
ntibiotics to clear infection, particularly mass drug administration of the antibiotic azithromycin, which is donated by the manufacturer to national programmes through the International Trachoma Initiative;
F
acial cleanliness; and
E
nvironmental improvement, particularly better access to water and sanitation.
WHO adopted the SAFE strategy in 1993 and continues in its mandate to provide leadership and coordination of international efforts to eliminate trachoma as a public health problem.
Fact sheets
Trachoma
Questions and answers
Frequently asked questions on Trachoma
Databases and tools
Status of elimination of trachoma as a public health problem, 2019
Global Health Observatory (GHO) interactive graph
Global Health Observatory data repository
Global Atlas of Trachoma
Preventive chemotherapy data portal
Resolutions and decisions
Global elimination of blinding trachoma (WHA51.11)
Technical work
Control of Neglected tropical diseases
News
All →
12 November 2025
News release
Egypt becomes the seventh country in the Eastern Mediterranean Region to eliminate trachoma as a public health problem
20 October 2025
News release
Fiji becomes the 26th country to eliminate trachoma as a public health problem
15 July 2025
News release
Senegal joins growing list of countries that have eliminated trachoma
11 July 2025
News release
Burundi eliminates trachoma as a public health problem
Events
23 January 2024 18:00 – 19:00 CET
Canadian engagement in global trachoma elimination strategies
23 January 2024 15:00 – 17:00 GMT
Trachoma: Accelerating progress to elimination as a public health problem
Publications
All →
18 July 2025
WHO Alliance for the Global Elimination of Trachoma: progress report on elimination...
Weekly epidemiological record
Download
Read More
6 January 2025
Diagnostic target product profiles for trachoma surveillance
The need for interventions against active trachoma has traditionally been determined using the prevalence of clinical signs that are associated with conjunctival...
Download
Read More
Call
25 July 2023
Call for consultation
Call for public consultation  ̶  Target Product Profiles (TPP) for trachoma surveillance
Our work
Providing technical leadership and coordination for trachoma elimination
Facilitating research  for trachoma elimination
Eliminating trachoma through high-quality data
Multimedia
Infographic
Trachoma -- Defeating the world's leading infectious cause of blindness
26 March 2015
Trachoma -- Nieba's story
Photo story
23 May 2019
Ghana eliminates trachoma, freeing millions from suffering and blindness
10 Facts
4 April 2020
Trachoma
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for
Trachoma
and
Trichiasis
Partners
International Coalition for Trachoma Control
International Trachoma initiative
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr Anthony Solomon
Medical officer
solomona@who.int
@anthonywsolomon
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Yaws (Endemic treponematoses)
Communicable diseases
Buruli ulcer  (Mycobacterium ulcerans infection)
Diseases and conditions
Leishmaniasis
Diseases and conditions
Lymphatic filariasis (Elephantiasis)