Vaccines and immunization
Skip to main content
Overview
Immunization is a global health success story, saving millions of lives every year. Vaccines reduce risks of getting a disease by working with your body’s natural defenses to build protection. When you get a vaccine, your immune system responds.
We now have vaccines to prevent more than 30 life-threatening diseases and infections, helping people of all ages live longer, healthier lives. Immunization currently prevents 3.5 million to 5 million deaths every year from diseases like diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough), influenza and measles.
Immunization is key to primary health care, an indisputable human right, and one of the best health investments money can buy. Vaccines are also critical to the prevention and control of infectious disease outbreaks. They underpin global health security and are a vital tool in the battle against antimicrobial resistance.
The COVID-19 pandemic strained health systems, resulting in dramatic setbacks. The most recent data for diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus (DTP) immunization coverage underscores the need for ongoing catch-up, recovery and system-strengthening.
Measles, because of its high transmissibility, quickly exposes immunity. In 2024, the routine first dose of measles vaccine was missed by 20.6 million children – far from the 2019 level of 19.3 million children.
Impact
Vaccines train your immune system to create antibodies, just as it does when it’s exposed to a disease. However, because vaccines contain only killed or weakened forms of germs like viruses or bacteria, they do not cause the disease or put you at risk of its complications.
Vaccines protect against many different diseases
, including:
cervical cancer
cholera
COVID-19
dengue
diphtheria
Ebola
hepatitis B
influenza
Japanese encephalitis
malaria
measles
meningitis
mpox
mumps
pertussis
pneumonia
polio
rabies
rotavirus
rubella
tetanus
typhoid
varicella
yellow fever
Not all these vaccinations may be needed in your country. Some may only be given prior to travel, in areas of risk, or to people in high-risk occupations. Talk to your health-care provider to find out what vaccinations are needed for you and your family.
WHO response
WHO is working with countries and partners to improve global vaccination coverage, including through these initiatives adopted by the World Health Assembly in August 2020.
Immunization Agenda 2030
IA2030 sets an ambitious, overarching global vision and strategy for vaccines and immunization for the decade 2021–2030. It was co-created with thousands of contributions from countries and organizations around the world. It draws on lessons from the past decade and acknowledges continuing and new challenges posed by infectious diseases (e.g. Ebola, COVID-19).
The strategy has been designed to respond to the interests of every country and intends to inspire and align the activities of community, national, regional and global stakeholders towards achieving a world where everyone, everywhere fully benefits from vaccines for good health and well-being. IA2030 is operationalized through regional and national strategies and a mechanism to ensure ownership and accountability and a monitoring and evaluation framework to guide country implementation.
Immunization Agenda 2030: A Global Strategy to Leave No One Behind
Implementing the Immunization Agenda 2030: A Framework for Action
Fact sheets
Immunization coverage
Cholera
Cervical cancer
Influenza (seasonal)
Malaria
Measles
Poliomyelitis
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
Rubella
Yellow fever
Questions and answers
WHO/UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage
Vaccines and immunization: Vaccine safety
Vaccines and immunization: What is vaccination?
How can I avoid getting the flu?
Databases and tools
Global Health Observatory – Immunization coverage
Vaccine-preventable disease country profiles
Vaccination Information Hub
Resolutions and decisions
WHA65.17 Global Vaccine Action Plan
WHA65.18 World Immunization Week
WHA68.6 Global Vaccine Action Plan
WHA70.14 Strengthening immunization to achieve the goals of the global vaccine action plan
Initiatives and groups
Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE)
Malaria Vaccine Implementation Programme (MVIP)
Technical work
Department of Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
News
All →
16 November 2025
Departmental update
A flagship program: Virtual cGMP Training Marathon to build manufacturing workforce skills across all WHO regions
6 November 2025
Departmental update
New WHO report urges bold steps for equitable access to novel TB vaccines
3 November 2025
Departmental update
SAGE September 2025: key outcomes and priority actions for global immunization
2 October 2025
Departmental update
WHO’s 6th Virtual cGMP Training Marathon concludes, reinforcing global manufacturing capacities
Latest publications
All →
14 November 2025
Sixteenth Meeting of the WHO South-East Asia Regional Immunization Technical Advisory Group
The WHO South-East Asia Regional Immunization Technical Advisory Group (SEAR-ITAG) serves as the regional forum for providing independent, evidence-based...
Download
Read More
7 November 2025
The global smart
pharmacovigilance strategy
Trust in regulated medical products (medicines, vaccines and other health products)
to protect health, is mostly based on a number of principles: the...
Download
Read More
6 November 2025
Catalyzing solutions for equitable global access and sustainable financing for novel tuberculosis vaccines...
This report was developed by the WHO TB Vaccine Accelerator Finance and Access working group, co-led by WHO, Gavi and the Government of South Africa. It...
Download
Read More
3 November 2025
World Local Production Forum on enhancing access to medicines and other health technologies: report of...
This report provides an overview of the third WLPF, held from April 7 to 9, 2024, in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Organized by the WHO Local Production...
Download
Read More
Our work
Preparing and preventing epidemics and pandemics
Immunizing against HPV
Feature stories
All →
30 October 2025
WHO: sustaining health services in Somalia amid unprecedented funding challenges
4 September 2025
What's in a vaccine?
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
24 April 2025
The unsung vaccination hero whose ingenuity and collaboration has saved millions of lives
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Malaria Vaccines (RTS,S/AS01 and R21/Matrix-M) infographic, December 2024
Infographic
Risk/Benefit considerations when deciding on CTC
Infographic
What is a Controlled Temperature Chain (CTC)?
Infographic
Qu’est-ce qu’une Chaîne à Température Contrôlée (CTC) ?
Videos
All →
23 July 2025
WHO press conference on global health issues – 23 July 2025
2 July 2025
The Power of the HPV Vaccine - Manar's story
14 May 2025
Sudan: Malaria vaccination in times of conflict
1 May 2025
WHO press conference on global health issues – 1 May 2025
Podcasts
Episode #138 – The truth about vaccine safety
Are vaccines safe? What’s actually in them? In this 2-part episode of Science in 5, WHO’s Dr Kate O’Brien breaks down how vaccines are tested, approved, and monitored even after they reach the public. She also explains what happens if a safety concern is flagged.
Episode #137 - Vaccines: science vs. scare
Should kids just “get the disease” instead of being vaccinated? Can vaccines really overwhelm a child’s immune system? Who decides what vaccines we get—and why? If you’re a new parent with questions about vaccines, you’re not alone. In this 2-part episode of Science in 5, WHO’s Dr. Kate O’Brien breaks down the science behind childhood vaccinations, the importance of the schedule, and the truth behind common concerns.
Episode #70 - Upcoming new vaccines
What are the new vaccines in the pipeline? What are the challenges to turning vaccines into vaccination ? What timelines can we expect for future vaccines? WHO’s Dr Katherine O’Brien explains in Science in 5.
Episode #67 - Understanding immunity
WHO’s Chief Scientist Dr Soumya Swaminathan explains how our body develops immunity against a new virus. How is immunity developed when we are infected with SARS-CoV-2 virus? How is it different from vaccine derived immunity? Why is it important to continue to wear masks, ventilate closed spaces, avoid crowds, wash hands and observe all other precautions?
Spotlights
History of vaccination
Vaccines have saved more human lives than any other medical invention in history. Read about how in the last millennium these extraordinary discoveries and achievements have changed our lives.
Campaigns
World Immunization Week
World Immunization Week, celebrated in the last week of April, aims to highlight the collective action needed and to promote the use of vaccines to protect people of all ages against disease.
Events
All →
23 – 27 February 2026
Immunization and vaccines related implementation research advisory committee (IVIR-AC) - February 2026
9 – 12 March 2026
Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) - March 2026
21 – 25 September 2026
Immunization and vaccines related implementation research advisory committee (IVIR-AC) - September 2026
5 – 8 October 2026
Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) - October 2026
Related health topics
Non-communicable diseases
Cervical cancer
Diseases and conditions
Cholera
Communicable diseases
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
Diseases and conditions
Dengue and severe dengue
Communicable diseases
Diphtheria
Communicable diseases
Hepatitis
Diseases and conditions
Influenza (seasonal)
Diseases and conditions
Malaria
Diseases and conditions
Measles
Communicable diseases
Meningitis
Diseases and conditions
Pertussis
Diseases and conditions
Pneumonia
Diseases and conditions
Poliomyelitis (polio)
Diseases and conditions
Rabies
Diseases and conditions
Tick-borne encephalitis
Diseases and conditions
Tuberculosis
Diseases and conditions
Typhoid
Diseases and conditions
Yellow fever