Mycetoma, chromoblastomycosis and other deep mycoses
Skip to main content
Overview
Mycetoma is a chronic, progressively destructive morbid
inflammatory disease usually of the foot but any part of the body can be
affected. Infection is most probably acquired by traumatic inoculation
of certain fungi or ‎bacteria into the subcutaneous tissue. Mycetoma was
described in the modern literature in 1694 but was first reported in
the mid-19th century in the Indian town of Madura, and hence was
initially called Madura foot.
Mycetoma commonly affects young adults, particularly males
aged between 20 and 40 years, mostly in  developing countries. People of
low socioeconomic status and manual workers such as agriculturalists,
labourers and herdsmen are the worst affected.
Mycetoma has numerous adverse medical, health and socioeconomic impacts on patients, communities and health authorities.
As mycetoma is a badly neglected disease, accurate data on its incidence and prevalence are not available.
Symptoms
Mycetoma
is characterized by a triad of painless
‎subcutaneous mass, multiple sinuses and discharge ‎containing grains.
It usually ‎spreads to involve the skin, deep structures and bone
resulting in ‎destruction, ‎deformity and loss of function, which may be fatal. ‎Mycetoma commonly ‎involves the extremities, back and
gluteal region.‎
Given its slow progression, painless nature, massive lack of
health education and scarcity of medical and health facilities in
endemic areas, many patients present late with advanced infection where
amputation may be the only available treatment.  Secondary bacterial
infection is common, and lesions may cause increased pain and disability
and fatal septicaemia (severe infections involving the entire human
system) if untreated. Infection is not transmitted from human to human.
Treatment
The treatment depends on the causative organisms for the
bacterial causes; it is a long term antibiotics combination whereas for
the fungal type,  treatment requires combined antifungals drugs and
surgery. The treatment is unsatisfactory, has many side effects, is
expensive and not available in most endemic areas.
Mycetoma is not a notifiable disease (a disease required by
law to be reported) and no surveillance systems exist.  There no
preventable or control programmes for mycetoma yet.  Preventing
infection is difficult, but people living in or travelling to endemic
areas should be advised not to walk barefooted.
Fact sheets
Mycetoma
Sporotrichosis
Chromoblastomycosis
WHO Resolution
Addressing the burden of mycetoma
| WHA69.21
Databases and tools
Prevalence of mycetoma per 100 000 population, latest year available
Mycetoma cases reported latest year available
Initiatives and groups
Skin NTDs Laboratory Network (Skin NTDs LABNET)
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
News
All →
26 May 2025
Departmental update
Progress for NTDs: two resolutions adopted at WHA78
1 April 2025
Departmental update
Global meeting calls for stronger partnerships to tackle skin NTDs
24 March 2025
Departmental update
Second global meeting on skin NTDs focuses on advancing integration and innovation
10 February 2025
Departmental update
WHO and Anesvad Foundation to extend collaboration on skin NTDs in sub-Saharan Africa
OpenWHO Course
Mycetoma: Training of health workers at national and district levels on skin-NTDs
Chromoblastomycosis: Training for national and district-level health workers
Events
16 July 2025 14:00 – 16:00 EET
Webinar - Uniting against mycetoma: innovative solutions, urgent action
Working Groups
WHO Skin NTDs Working Groups (office.com)
Following the Skin NTD Meeting held in Geneva, Switzerland from 27-31 March 2023, WHO is proposing to establish different INFORMAL WORKING GROUPS to help follow up of the main outcomes and keep the momentum.
Our work
Fostering partnerships and coordination for the control of mycetoma
Supporting countries endemic for mycetoma
Promoting the integrated approach to skin-related neglected tropical diseases
Strengthening research capacity into mycetoma
Calls
3 October 2025
Call for consultation
Survey : WHA resolution on skin diseases as a global public health priority
Publications
All →
13 June 2025
Skin health for all: update on skin neglected tropical diseases with a focus on Buruli...
Weekly epidemiological record
Download
Read More
22 January 2025
Harmonizing diagnostic polymerase chain reaction procedures for skin-related neglected tropical diseases:...
The meeting on harmonizing diagnostic polymerase chain reaction (PCR) procedures for skin-related neglected tropical diseases (skin NTDs) took place in...
Download
Read More
23 May 2024
Report of the first WHO global meeting on skin-related neglected tropical diseases: Geneva, Switzerland,...
The World Health Organization (WHO) held its inaugural global meeting on skin-related neglected
tropical diseases (skin NTDs) on 27–31 March 2023,...
Download
Read More
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for
Mycetoma
or
chromoblastomycosis
and
other deep mycoses
More information
Chromoblastomycosis and other deep mycoses
Multimedia
Infographic
Countries reporting cases on at least one skin-NTD, 2017-2021
20 October 2020
How do we tackle the skin NTDs to reach the 2030 NTD road map targets?
19 February 2020
Mycetoma: Hope for a Devastating Neglected Disease
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr. Kingsley Bampoe Asiedu
Medical officer
asieduk@who.int
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Buruli ulcer  (Mycobacterium ulcerans infection)
15 November 2023
Chromoblastomycosis
Diseases and conditions
Leprosy (Hansen disease)
15 November 2023
Sporotrichosis
Diseases and conditions
Yaws (Endemic treponematoses)