Child health
Skip to main content
Overview
Protecting and improving the health of children is of fundamental importance. Over the past several decades, we have seen dramatic progress in improving the health and reducing the mortality rate of young children. Among other encouraging statistics,
the number of children dying before the age of 5 was halved from 2000 to 2017, and more mothers and children are surviving today than ever before.
However, a great deal of work remains to further improve the health outcomes for children. The world is facing a double mandate. More than half of child deaths are due to conditions that could be easily prevented or treated given access to health care
and improvements to their quality of life.
At the same time, children must also be given a stable environment in which to thrive, including good health and nutrition, protection from threats and access to opportunities to learn and grow. Investing in children is one of the most important things
a society can do to build a better future.
Learn more about child health and COVID-19
Causes
Vast disparities exist around the world in a child’s chances of survival, with low- and middle-income countries disproportionately affected. Sub-Saharan Africa has the highest child mortality rate in the world, in some places 15 times higher than in high-income countries. The leading causes of death among children include respiratory infections, diarrhoeal diseases, measles, malaria, malnutrition and newborn conditions. Many child deaths are preventable through vaccination, adequate home care, access to health care services, improved rates of breastfeeding and better nutrition. However, many of the life-saving interventions are beyond the reach of the world’s poorest people.
Survival is just one of many issues relevant to children’s health. Child health, growth and development are inseparable. In 2016, at least 250 million children were not able to reach their full physical or psychological development. This represents the staggering figure of 43%. Violence against children is also rampant. In 2019, abuse or neglect affected as many as 1 billion children.
WHO Response
WHO works with partners and Member States to improve the lives of all children and meet the targets of Sustainable Development Goal 3, which aims to end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 by 2030. If all countries reach this goal, 11 million lives will be saved, more than half of them in sub-Saharan Africa.
WHO advocates for health equity through universal health coverage (UHC) and the global availability of vaccines to prevent some of the deadliest childhood diseases. WHO also promotes infant and young child feeding, with a focus on exclusive breastfeeding for infants. It has developed and promotes an integrated approach to managing childhood illness that considers all aspects of a child’s health, and a continuum of care throughout the early years to safeguard their developmental outcomes, including the reduction of risk factors for diseases that can arise later in life.
These goals are a collaboration between many WHO departments and coordinated through the Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health, and Ageing.
Fact sheets
Childhood cancer
Child maltreatment
Infant and young child feeding
Newborns: improving survival and well-being
Violence against children
Questions and answers
What are the risks of diabetes in children?
Why are so many children involved in road traffic crashes?
How can violence against children be prevented?
What is the recommended food for children in their very early years?
Child health: Key dangers
Databases and tools
Maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health, data portal
Global database on child growth and malnutrition
Resolutions and decisions
WHA69.2: Committing to implementation of the Global Strategy for Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ Health
WHA64.7: Strengthening nursing and midwifery
WHA63.23: Infant and young child nutrition
WHA47.9: Maternal and child health and family planning: quality of care
Technical work
Child Health and Development Unit
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Ageing
Our work
Preventing impacts of electronic waste on child health
Rethinking the child health agenda
Managing childhood illness
Strengthening health services with quality
Promoting healthy growth and development
Ending TB in children and adolescents
Donating high‐quality medicines and diagnostics for the control of STH in children
Improving the mental and brain health of children and adolescents
Improving the childhood cancer cure rate
Investing in school health
News
All →
20 November 2025
Departmental update
World Children’s Day: accelerating access to better medicines for children
6 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO publishes new global research agenda to strengthen paediatric clinical trials
17 September 2025
Departmental update
"Patient safety from the start!" — WHO urges global investment in safe paediatric and newborn care
29 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO and Noora Health begin collaboration to strengthen support for family caregivers
Events
All →
17 – 19 November 2025
12th Online Meeting of the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts (STAGE) for Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Nutrition (MNCAHN)
10 – 12 June 2025
11th Meeting of the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts (STAGE) for Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Nutrition (MNCAHN)
Latest publications
All →
20 November 2025
Paediatric drug optimization for epilepsy: meeting report, 1-2 July 2025
The PADO for epilepsy exercise aimed to support the identification of short- and long term priorities for epilepsy medicines for the paediatric age group,...
Download
Read More
20 November 2025
Towards closing the gap in access to child-friendly formulations of essential medicines
Over four years, under the framework of GAP-f, WHO comprehensively
reviewed formulations of medicines listed on the EMLc to inform the 2023
and 2025...
Download
Read More
14 November 2025
Paediatric drug optimization for malaria: meeting report, 24-26 June 2025
This report provides a synthesis of the outcomes of the first paediatric drug optimization exercise that was held for Malaria. The PADO for malaria meeting...
Download
Read More
10 facts on child health
13 September 2024
Children's environmental health
29 August 2024
E-waste and Child Health
Feature stories
23 October 2024
Building equality into the health systems treating childhood cancer
13 August 2024
Breaking barriers, building bridges: the collaborative effort to reach every child in Nigeria
13 August 2024
Strengthening Primary Health Care with a Community Health Strategy in Mozambique
Infographics
All →
Infographic
48% of infants under 6 months old are exclusively breastfed
Infographic
Investing in breastfeeding means investing in the future
Infographic
Breast-Milk is the first superfood
Infographic
Listen, support, empower: WHO recommends at least 6 contacts with a breastfeeding counsellor
Videos
All →
1 September 2025
Patient safety from the start! Protecting every child’s health journey
5 June 2025
Improving quality of care to save lives in Sierra Leone
11 February 2025
Childhood cancer medicines: WHO and St. Jude launch groundbreaking international platform for access
12 January 2025
Strengthening implementation of home-based records for maternal, newborn and child health
Related health topics
Health and wellbeing
Child growth
Physical environment
Children's environmental health
Human behaviour
Violence against children