Hendra virus infection
Skip to main content
Overview
Hendra virus (HeV) infection is a rare emerging zoonosis (disease that can be transmitted to humans from animals) that causes severe and often fatal disease in both infected horses and humans. The natural host of the virus has been identified as being
fruit bats of the
Pteropodidae
Family,
Pteropus
genus.
HeV was identified during the first recorded outbreak of the disease in the Brisbane suburb of Hendra, Australia, in 1994. The outbreak involved 21 stabled racehorses and two human cases. As of July 2016, 53 disease incidents involving over 70 horses have been reported. These incidents were all confined to the north-eastern coast of Australia. A total of seven humans have contracted Hendra virus
from infected horses, particularly through close contact during care or necropsy of ill or dead horses
Symptoms
Symptoms of Hendra virus infection in humans range from mild influenza-like illness to fatal respiratory or neurological disease.
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for human cases of Hendra virus. Intensive supportive care is provided, and the use of monoclonal antibodies is being investigated.
A registered Hendra animal vaccine exists and vaccination is recognised as an effective way to reduce the risk of horses becoming infected and to reduce the likelihood of human exposure.
Fact sheets
Nipah virus
Disease outbreak news
Latest outbreak news
Technical work
Emergencies
Latest publications
All →
7 January 2020
Guidance on regulations for the transport of infectious substances 2019 – 2020
World Health Organization. (‎2019)‎. Guidance on regulations for the transport of infectious substances 2019 – 2020: applicable...
Download
Read More
27 December 2019
Communication for behavioural impact (COMBI) - field workbook
This field workbook supports the implementation of the interagency (FAO, UNICEF, WHO) “Communication for Behavioural Impact (COMBI): A toolkit for...
Download
Read More
27 December 2012
Communication for behavioural impact (COMBI) - toolkit
This interagency (FAO, UNICEF, WHO) toolkit will be useful for anyone wanting to design effective outbreak prevention and control measures in community...
Download
Read More
27 February 2004
Nipah virus WER No 9 , 2004
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Hendra virus outbreaks map
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Nipah virus infection