Congenital disorders
Skip to main content
Overview
Congenital disorders can be defined as structural or functional anomalies
that occur during intrauterine life. Also called birth defects, congenital anomalies
or congenital malformations, these conditions develop prenatally and may be
identified before or at birth, or later in life. An estimated 6% of babies
worldwide are born with a congenital disorder, resulting in hundreds of
thousands of associated deaths. However, the true number of cases may be much
higher because statistics do not often consider terminated pregnancies and
stillbirths.
Some congenital disorders can be treated with surgical and non-surgical
options, such as cleft lip and palate, clubfoot and hernias. Others, including
heart defects, neural tube defects, and down syndrome, can cause lifelong
impacts.
Congenital disorders are one of the main causes of the global burden of
disease, and low- and middle-income countries are disproportionately affected.
These areas are also less likely to have facilities to treat reversible conditions
such as clubfoot, leading to more pronounced and long-lasting effects.
Causes
Approximately 50% of
congenital disorders cannot be linked to a specific cause. However, known
causes include single gene defects, chromosomal disorders, multifactorial
inheritance, environmental teratogens and micronutrient deficiencies. Genetic
causes can be traced to inherited genes or from mutations. Consanguinity – when
parents are related by blood – increases the risk of congenital anomalies and
nearly doubles the risk of neonatal and early childhood death, intellectual
disability and other health conditions. Advanced maternal age also increases
the risk of chromosomal abnormalities, including Down syndrome. Some diseases
are known to cause increases in rates of congenital disorders including Zika
virus, syphilis and rubella. Other anomalies, such as cystic fibrosis and
haemophilia C, are more prevalent in specific ethnic communities.
The vast majority
(94%) of congenital disorders occur in low- and middle-income countries.
Possible causes include lack of screening and prenatal care, insufficient
access to nutritious foods for pregnant women, use or contact with alcohol or
tobacco, and increased exposure to infection or environmental
contaminants.
Some congenital disorders
can be prevented through screening, vaccination, fortification of staple foods
with nutrients such as folic acid and iodine, and adequate antenatal care,
among other methods.
Impact
Around the world each year, an estimated 295 000 newborns die before
reaching 4 weeks of age due to congenital disorders and associated
complications.
Congenital anomalies can contribute to life-long disability and health
conditions. Over 50% of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) lost each year
due to congenital disorders could be prevented with prompt surgery or other treatment.
For example, 100 000 babies are born each year with clubfoot, which can be
easily corrected. Left untreated, however, this condition can cause severe and
permanent disability.
Many congenital disorders result in social stigma and discrimination, which
can lead to embarrassment, isolation and other reductions in community
interaction. These conditions also have a high economic cost; long-term
disability creates significant impact on individuals, families, health care
systems and societies. These effects are amplified in low- and middle-income
countries where lack of accessibility and availability of support services may
make living with an impairment more difficult.
Fact sheets
Congenital disorders
Newborns: improving survival and well-being
Malnutrition
Rubella
Questions and answers
What is a preterm baby?
Guidelines
WHO guideline on syphilis screening and treatment for pregnant women
Guidelines for the development of national programmes for monitoring birth defects / prepared by the International Centre for Birth Defects of the International Clearinghouse for Birth Defects Monitoring Systems (‎ICBDMS)
Guideline: optimal serum and red blood cell folate concentrations in women of reproductive age for prevention of neural tube defects
Databases and tools
Global database on the implementation of nutrition action (GINA)
Nutrition landscape information system (NLiS)
Tookit for Health Needs Assessment in Congenital Disorders
Resolutions and decisions
WHA63.17: Birth defects
Technical work
Newborn Health Unit
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Ageing
Nutrition and Food Safety
Sensory Functions, Disability and Rehabilitation
Sexual and Reproductive Health
Our work
Promoting healthy pregnancy
Identifying common areas of progress with the Every Newborn Action Plan
Research in maternal, perinatal, and adolescent health
Addressing critical knowledge gaps in newborn health
News
All →
Publications
All 	→
18 November 2024
Birth defects surveillance training: facilitator’s guide, second edition
This Birth Defect Surveillance facilitator (train-the-trainer) guide 2nd edition covers foundational skills needed to begin the development, implementation...
Download
Read More
17 November 2024
Birth defects surveillance training: facilitator’s guide, second edition. Participant workbook
This facilitator (train-the-trainer) Birth Defect Surveillance Training guide workbook 2nd edition accompanies the Birth Defect Surveillance Training facilitator...
Download
Read More
5 October 2021
Antigen-detection in the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection: interim guidance, 6 October 2021
Download
Read More
1 December 2020
Birth defects surveillance: A manual for programme managers, 2nd Edition
A wide range of causes of congenital anomalies means that a portfolio of prevention approaches is needed including prevention of sexually transmitted infections,...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
1 April 2019
Preventing malaria in pregnancy in remote African communities
24 February 2016
Zika response accelerates as WHO Director-General visits Brazil
Commentaries
All →
15 February 2018
A “good birth” goes beyond having a healthy baby
Related health topics
Health and wellbeing
Child growth
Populations and demographics
Child health
Populations and demographics
Disability
Diseases and conditions
Malnutrition
Populations and demographics
Newborn health
Human behaviour
Nutrition
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health
Diseases and conditions
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)