Violence against children
Skip to main content
Overview
Violence against children includes all forms of violence against people under 18 years old. For infants and younger children, violence mainly involves child maltreatment (i.e. physical, sexual and emotional abuse and neglect) at the hands of parents and other authority figures. Boys and girls are at equal risk of physical and emotional abuse and neglect, and girls are at greater risk of sexual abuse. As children reach adolescence, peer violence and intimate partner violence, in addition to child maltreatment, become highly prevalent.
Violence against children can be prevented. Preventing and responding to violence against children requires that efforts systematically address risk and protective factors at all four interrelated levels of risk (individual, relationship, community, society).
A May 2016 World Health Assembly resolution endorsed the first ever WHO
Global plan of action on strengthening the role of the health system within a national multisectoral response to address interpersonal violence, in particular against women and girls, and against children.
According to this plan, WHO in collaboration with Member States and other partners, is committed to:
Monitoring the global magnitude and characteristics of violence against children and supporting country efforts to document and measure such violence.
Maintaining an electronic information system that summarizes the scientific data on the burden, risk factors and consequences of violence against children, and the evidence for its preventability.
Developing and disseminating evidence-based technical guidance documents, norms and standards for preventing and responding to violence against children.
Regularly publishing global status reports on country efforts to address violence against children through national policies and action plans, laws, prevention programmes and response services.
Supporting countries and partners in implementing evidence-based prevention and response strategies, such as those included in
INSPIRE: Seven strategies for ending violence against children
.
Collaborating with international agencies and organizations to reduce and eliminate violence against children globally, through initiatives such as the Global Partnership to End Violence against Children, Together for Girls and the Violence Prevention Alliance.
Child maltreatment
Child maltreatment is the abuse and neglect that occurs to children under 18 years of age. It includes all types of physical and/or emotional ill-treatment, sexual abuse, neglect, negligence and commercial or other exploitation, which results in actual or potential harm to the child’s health, survival, development or dignity in the context of a relationship of responsibility, trust or power. Exposure to intimate partner violence is also sometimes included as a form of child maltreatment.
Child maltreatment has enormous immediate and long-term repercussions. Beyond death, physical injury and disability, violence can lead to stress that impairs brain development and damages the nervous and immune systems. This in turn is associated with delayed cognitive development, poor school performance and dropout, mental health problems, suicide attempts, increased health-risk behaviours, revictimization and the perpetration of violence. The good news is that child maltreatment can be prevented through interventions that support parents and caregivers, promote non-violent norms and values, provide education and life skills training, strengthen families’ income and economic security, offer high quality response and support services, create and sustain safe environments for children, and implement and enforce laws against child maltreatment.
WHO, in collaboration with a number of partners:
provides technical and normative guidance for evidence-based child maltreatment prevention;
advocates for increased international support for and investment in evidence-based child maltreatment prevention;
provides technical support for evidence-based child maltreatment prevention programmes in several low- and middle-income countries.
Youth violence
Youth violence is a global public health problem. It includes a range of acts from bullying and physical fighting, to more severe sexual and physical assault to homicide.
Youth violence dramatically increases health, welfare and criminal justice costs; reduces productivity;  and generally undermines the fabric of society. Beyond deaths, injuries and psychological harm, youth violence can lead to increased health risk behaviours such as smoking,
substance abuse
, unsafe sex, and further violence. These in turn are associated with chronic respiratory diseases, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, early pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases. Effective prevention and response strategies include those that promote parenting and early childhood development; school-based bullying prevention, academic, and life and social skills development programmes; therapeutic approaches with high-risk individuals, and community- and society-level approaches like reducing access to and
misuse of alcohol
and firearms, hotspots and problem-oriented policing, urban upgrading, and poverty de-concentration.
WHO and partners decrease youth violence through initiatives that help to identify, quantify and respond to the problem, these include:
developing a package for schools-based violence prevention programmes;
drawing attention to the magnitude of youth violence and the need for prevention;
building evidence on the scope and types of violence in different settings;
developing guidance for Member States and all relevant sectors to prevent youth violence and strengthen responses to it;
supporting national efforts to prevent youth violence; and
collaborating with international agencies and organizations to prevent youth violence globally.
Fact sheets
Violence against children
Child maltreatment
Youth violence
Corporal punishment of children and health
Databases and tools
Violence Info
Global school-based student health survey
US CDC Violence against Children Surveys
Initiatives and groups
Parenting for Lifelong Health
Violence Prevention Alliance
Council of Champions on ending violence against children
Resolutions and decisions
Ending violence against children through health systems strengthening and multisectoral approaches (WHA74.17)
WHO global plan of action to strengthen the role of the health system within a national multisectoral response to address interpersonal violence, in particular against women and girls, and against children (WHA69.5)
Implementing the recommendations of the World report on violence and health (WHA56.24)
Prevention of violence (WHA50.19)
Prevention of violence: public health priority (WHA49.25)
Training
Child maltreatment prevention course
Technical work
Social Determinants of Health
Our work
Preventing violence against children
Caring for child victims of violence
Measuring and evaluating child maltreatment
Building capacity for violence and injury prevention
Online violence against children
Council of Champions
News
All →
20 August 2025
Departmental update
New report demonstrates that corporal punishment harms children’s health
7 November 2024
News release
Countries pledge to act on childhood violence affecting
some 1 billion children
30 May 2024
Joint News Release
Sudan’s children trapped in critical malnutrition crisis, warn UN agencies
18 December 2023
Departmental update
Addressing Global Health Challenges: Irish Taoiseach Varadkar and WHO Director-General in Dublin Talks
Infographics
All →
Infographic
INSPIRE - English
Infographic
Child maltreatment
Infographic
Youth violence
Infographic
Ending violence against children
Feature story
4 February 2021
In Somalia, health workers, girls and women are experts in preventing female genital mutilation
Infographics on online violence against children
30 June 2022
Violence against children online
What health systems and health care providers can do
Download
Read More
Infographic
What is online violence against children?
Infographic
How many children are affected by by violence online?
Infographic
1 in 2 children is a victim of violence
Infographic
1 in 5 girls & 1 in 7 boys experience sexual violence
Infographic
Violence against children takes multiple forms
Infographic
What governments can do to prevent violence against children
Infographic
Support children and keep them safe from abuse
Videos
All →
Survivors of violence tell their stories
6 May 2025
Scaling MaPa within a National Program
6 May 2025
Parenting Program in Central African Republic Video Part 2
6 May 2025
Parenting Program in Central African Republic Video Part 1
6 May 2025
Scaling up Evidence Based Parenting Programmes in Tanzania
Publications
All 	→
Global status report on preventing violence against children 2020
INSPIRE Technical Package
29 October 2025
The role of the health sector in supporting parents and caregivers to meet their parenting potential
Supporting parents and caregivers requires a whole-of-society approach, with coordinated responses from the health, education, social services, private...
Download
Read More
11 August 2025
Corporal punishment of children: the public health impact
This technical report describes the prevalence, risk factors for, and consequences of child corporal punishment, which it defines as “any punishment...
Download
Read More
27 March 2025
Report on the global arbovirus surveillance and response capacity survey 2021-2022
In 2021-2022 the World Health Organization (WHO) conducted a survey to assess current surveillance and response guidelines and practices across WHO Member...
Download
Read More
12 September 2024
Supporting parents and caregivers: mapping and scoping review of experiences in Europe and central Asia
This report provides an overview of parenting support programmes in Europe and central Asia, based on a mapping and scoping review of parenting programmes...
Download
Read More
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Events
All →
7 – 8 November 2024
1st Global Ministerial Conference on Ending Violence Against Children
2 – 4 September 2024
15th World Conference on Injury Prevention and Safety Promotion
16 April 2024 12:00 – 13:00 CET
Pornography, young people, and the commercial and social determinants of violence
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Maternal health
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health
Health interventions
Suicide prevention