Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis)
Skip to main content
Overview
Chagas disease, also known as American trypanosomiasis, is a potentially life-threatening illness caused by the protozoan parasite
Trypanosoma cruzi
.
An estimated 6 to 7 million people worldwide are  infected with
T. cruzi
. Chagas disease is found mainly in endemic areas of 21 continental Latin American countries
, where it is mostly transmitted when humans come into contact with faeces and/or urine of infected blood-sucking triatomine bugs (vector-borne transmission).
Chagas disease was once entirely confined to the Region of the Americas. In the last decades the epidemiological pattern of the disease  changed from a rural to a mostly urban disease, mainly due to population mobility, urbanization and emigration. As a consequence, increased  number of cases have been detected in Canada and the United States of America, and in many European and some African, Eastern Mediterranean and Western Pacific countries. Due to the high number of people who remain undiagnosed or untreated, combined with the areas with remaining active transmission, put an estimated 75 million people at risk of infection.
Triatomine bugs typically live in the wall or roof cracks of poorly constructed homes in rural or suburban areas, becoming active at night, biting exposed areas of skin, then defecating close to the bite.
The parasites enter the body when: i) the person inadvertently smears the bug’s waste into the bite or another skin break, the eyes or the mouth; ii) by consumption of food that has been contaminated with waste from infected triatomine bugs, typically infecting groups of people (causing outbreaks or oral transmission) with a higher frequency of severe disease and number of deaths.
Everywhere Chagas disease can be also transmitted through blood or blood product transfusion from infected donors; by congenital (mother to child) transmission during pregnancy or childbirth; by organ transplantation from infected donors; and also by laboratory accidents.
In May 2019, following up on decision of the 72
n
d
World Health Assembly, the World Chagas Disease Day was established to be celebrated on 14 April (the date of the year 1909 when Carlos Chagas diagnosed the first human case of the disease, a two-year-old girl called Berenice).
Symptoms
After the infection is transmitted there is an initial, acute phase that lasts for about two months. In most cases, symptoms are absent or mild and unspecific. In people bitten by a triatomine bug, characteristic first visible signs of infection, such as a skin lesion or a purplish swelling of the lids of one eye (the so-called Romaña sign), can help in the diagnosis of new cases. With any transmission route, patients can present fever, headache, enlarged lymph glands, pallor, muscle pain, difficulty in breathing, swelling, and abdominal or chest pain.
During the chronic phase that succeeds the acute phase, up to 30% of patients suffer from cardiac disorders and up to 10% experience digestive, neurological or mixed disorders. In later years, the infection can lead to sudden death principally due to heart arrhythmia or heart failure caused by the destruction of the heart muscle and its nervous system.
Treatment
Chagas disease can be treated with two antiparasitic medicines: benznidazole and nifurtimox. Both medicines are nearly 100% effective in curing the disease if given soon after infection, including the cases of congenital transmission. The efficacy of both diminishes, however, the longer a person has been infected and the adverse reactions are more frequent at older age.
Treatment is also indicated for those in whom the infection has been reactivated due to immunosuppression, and for patients during the early chronic phase. Infected adults, especially those with no symptoms, should be offered treatment because antiparasitic treatment can also prevent or curb disease progression and prevent congenital transmission in pregnant women. In other cases the potential benefits of medication in preventing or delaying the development of Chagas disease should be weighed against the duration of treatment (up to 2 months) and possible adverse reactions (occurring in up to 40% of treated adult patients).
Benznidazole and nifurtimox should not be taken by pregnant women or by people with kidney or liver failure. Nifurtimox is also contraindicated for people with a background of neurological or psychiatric disorders.
Additionally, specific treatment for cardiac, or digestive or neurological manifestations may be required.
Fact sheets
Chagas disease (also known as American trypanosomiasis)
Questions and answers
Frequently asked questions on Chagas disease
Databases and tools
Global distribution of cases of Chagas disease, based on official estimates, 2018
Global distribution of cases diagnosed and published with
Trypanosoma cruzi
and HIV coinfection, 2006–2010
Number of triatominea species identified
WHO Information System to Control and Eliminate NTDs (WISCENTD)
Resolutions and decisions
World Chagas Disease Day, 2019
| WHA72.20
Chagas disease: control and elimination, 2010
| WHA63.20
Elimination of transmission of Chagas disease, 1998
| WHA51.14
Technical work
Control of
Neglected Tropical Diseases
News
All →
4 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO and Bayer AG renew longstanding collaboration to eliminate three deadly neglected tropical diseases
11 April 2024
Departmental update
World Chagas Disease Day 2024: urging early diagnosis and care for life
14 April 2023
Departmental update
World Chagas Disease Day 2023 to focus on integrating universal care and surveillance at the primary care level
14 April 2022
Departmental update
World Chagas Disease Day: finding and reporting every case
Our work
Interrupting transmission of Chagas disease to humans
Implementing an information and surveillance system of Chagas disease
Providing information, education and communication for key people involved in Chagas disease control
Providing care to populations affected by Chagas disease
Publications
All →
13 February 2024
Operational manual on indoor residual spraying: Control of vectors of malaria, Aedes-borne...
This operational manual is designed to provide guidance on the establishment, management, implementation, reporting and evaluation of safe and effective...
Download
Read More
5 July 2022
The Road to 2030
In January 2021, the World Health Organization (WHO) published a new road map to address the burden of disease and death imposed by neglected tropical...
Download
Read More
27 May 2019
WHA72.20 World Chagas Disease Day
The Seventy-second World Health Assembly, having considered document A72/55 Rev.1, decided to establish World Chagas Disease Day, to be celebrated on 14...
Download
Read More
Facts in pictures
4 April 2024
Chagas disease
Multimedia
14 April 2025
World Chagas Disease Day 2025 - Message from Dr Tedros, Director General, WHO
11 April 2024
World Chagas Disease Day 2024 - Message from Dr Tedros, Director General, WHO
17 January 2024
The Kissing Bug doctors of Florida
14 April
World Chagas Disease Day
Visit the campaign page
www.flickr.com
Chagas disease illustration
©
Credits
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for
American trypanosomiasis
or
Chagas disease
Research and partnership
Partners and collaborating institutions
Technical groups on Chagas disease
The BeatChagas Platform
BeatChagas
Chagas disease in WHO regions
Pan American Health Organization
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr. Pedro Albajar Vinas
Medical officer
albajarvinasp@who.int
Materials  Informative, educational and communication
BEAT CHAGAS PLATORM
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Human African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness)