Ebola disease
Skip to main content
Overview
Ebola disease is a severe, often fatal illness affecting humans and other primates.
The virus is transmitted to people from wild animals (such as fruit bats, porcupines and non-human primates) and then spreads in the human population through direct contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials (e.g. bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids.
The average Ebola disease case fatality rate is around 50%. Case fatality rates have varied from 25–90% in past outbreaks.
The first Ebola disease outbreak occurred in remote villages in Central Africa, near tropical rainforests. The 2014–2016 Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa was the largest and most complex Ebola outbreak since the virus was first discovered in 1976. There were more cases and deaths in this outbreak than all others combined. It also spread between countries, starting in Guinea then moving across land borders to Sierra Leone and Liberia.
It is thought that fruit bats of the
Pteropodidae
family are natural hosts of the orthoebolavirus.
Symptoms
The incubation period, that is, the time interval from infection with the virus to onset of symptoms, is from 2 to 21 days. A person infected with Ebola cannot spread the disease until they develop symptoms.
Symptoms of Ebola disease can be sudden and include: fever, fatigue, malaise, muscle, pain, headache, and sore throat. These are followed by vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, rash, and symptoms of impaired kidney and liver function. In  less frequent cases, internal and external bleeding (e.g. oozing from the gums, blood in the stools), can occur.
It can be difficult to clinically distinguish Ebola from other infectious diseases such as malaria, typhoid fever and meningitis. A range of diagnostic tests have been developed to confirm the presence of the virus.
Treatment and prevention
Early intensive supportive care
–
rehydration with oral or intravenous fluids
–
and treatment of specific symptoms improves survival. A range of potential treatments is currently being evaluated.
For Ebola virus disease, WHO recommends treatment with the monoclonal antibodies mAb114 (ansuvimabTM) or REGN-EB3 (InmazebTM). For other Ebola diseases, there are no approved therapeutics, but candidate products are under development and a CORE protocol for clinical trials is available.
Two vaccines have been approved for Ebola disease: Ervebo® and Zabdeno and Mvabea® . The Ervebo vaccine is recommended as part of outbreak response.
Several candidate vaccines are at different stages of development for other Ebola diseases.
Community engagement is key to successfully controlling any outbreak. Outbreak control relies on using a range of interventions, such as clinical care, surveillance and contact tracing, laboratory services, infection prevention and control in health facilities, safe and dignified burials, vaccination (only for Ebola virus disease) and social mobilization.
Fact sheets
Ebola disease
Questions and answers
Ebola virus disease
Vaccines for Ebola virus disease
Emergency situations
Mubende district, Uganda, 2022
Mbandaka, Equateur Province, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2022
North Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo, October – December 2021
North Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo, February-May 2021
N’Zerekore, Guinea, February-June 2021
Équateur, Democratic Republic of the Congo, June-November 2020
North Kivu/Ituri, Democratic Republic of the Congo, August 2018 - June 2020
Équateur, Democratic Republic of the Congo, May-July 2018
Bas-Uélé, Democratic Republic of the Congo, May-July 2017
West Africa, 2014-2016
Disease outbreak news
Latest disease outbreak news
Initiatives and groups
International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision: Ebola vaccine stockpiles
Training
Learning resources on Ebola diseases
Technical work
Clinical management
Disease outbreaks
Health product policy and standards - vaccine standardization
Medical devices for Ebola outbreak
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research (SRH) and Ebola
R&D Blueprint
News
All →
30 July 2025
Departmental update
Paying tribute to David Nabarro
26 March 2025
Departmental update
WHO Launches Online Training to Strengthen Filovirus Outbreak Response
3 February 2025
News release
Groundbreaking Ebola vaccination trial launches today in Uganda
Democratic Republic of Congo declares new Ebola outbreak in Mbandaka
23 April 2022
Latest publications
All →
16 July 2025
Risk communication and community engagement readiness and response toolkit: ebola disease
This toolkit is a comprehensive set of practical tools and resources designed to support country-level risk communication and community engagement...
Download
Read More
19 March 2025
Infection prevention and control and water, sanitation and hygiene in health facilities during Ebola...
The Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) rapid assessment tool (RAT), is meant to assess health facilities with...
Download
Read More
19 November 2024
Facilitation manual: psychological first aid during Ebola virus disease outbreaks, 2nd edition
This manual is designed
to orient helpers to offer psychological first aid (PFA) to people affected by
an Ebola outbreak. PFA involves humane, supportive...
Download
Read More
27 August 2024
Ebola and Marburg disease outbreaks: infection prevention and control research priorities in health care...
Ebola virus (EBOV) and Marburg virus (MARV) are associated with severe, potentially fatal, systemic diseases. During the development of the Infection Prevention...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
19 September 2025
WHO Rapid Risk Assessment - Ebola Virus Disease, Democratic Republic of the Congo v.1
This Rapid Risk Assessment (RRA) aims to assess the risk of the Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, considering the public health...
Download
Read More
18 September 2025
WHO appeal: Ebola virus disease outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 2025
On 4 September 2025, the Ministry of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared an outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD). WHO is appealing...
Download
Read More
20 January 2025
Marburg virus – Therapeutics prioritisation
Prioritization of candidate treatments to be included in a randomized clinical trial
Download
Read More
29 October 2024
Solidarity Partners – Platform adaptive randomized trial for new and repurposed Filovirus treatments...
This protocol was written in accordance with the trial design and drug selection recommendations from the Filovirus therapeutics working group at WHO....
Download
Read More
Our work
Communicating risk in public health emergencies
Rapidly detecting and responding to health emergencies
Videos
All →
27 June 2018
Six things you need to know about Ebola
15 June 2015
WHO: If you can beat Ebola, you can beat anything
21 May 2015
WHO GO Training package: Introduction, module 1
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Pregnancy and Ebola
Infographic
Pregnancy care after Ebola
Infographic
Pregnancy after Ebola
Infographic
Breastfeeding and Ebola
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever
Communicable diseases
Lassa fever
Communicable diseases
Nipah virus infection
Communicable diseases
Rift Valley fever