Childhood cancer
Skip to main content
Overview
Cancer is a leading cause of death for children and adolescents. The likelihood of surviving a diagnosis of childhood cancer depends on the country in which the child lives; in high-income countries, more than 80% of children with cancer are cured, but in many low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) less than 30% are cured.
Although childhood cancer cannot generally be prevented or identified through screening, most types of childhood cancer can be cured with generic medicines and other forms of treatment, including surgery and radiotherapy.
The reasons for lower survival rates in LMICs include delay in diagnosis, an inability to obtain an accurate diagnosis, inaccessible therapy, abandonment of treatment, death from toxicity (side effects) and avoidable relapse. Improving access to childhood cancer care, including to essential medicines and technologies, is highly cost-effective, feasible and can improve survival in
all income settings
.
Childhood cancer data systems are needed to drive continuous improvements in the quality of care, and to inform policy decisions.
Causes
Cancer occurs in people of all ages and can affect any part of the body. It begins with genetic change in single cells, that can then grow into a mass (or tumour), invade other parts of the body and cause harm and death if left untreated. Unlike cancer in adults, most childhood cancers do not have a known cause. Many studies have sought to identify the causes of childhood cancer, but very few cancers in children are caused by environmental or lifestyle factors. Cancer prevention efforts in children should focus on behaviours that will prevent the child from developing preventable cancer as an adult.
Some chronic infections, such as HIV, Epstein-Barr virus and malaria, are risk factors for childhood cancer. They are particularly relevant in LMICs. Other infections can increase a child’s risk of developing cancer as an adult, so it is important to be vaccinated (against hepatitis B to help prevent liver cancer and against human papillomavirus to help prevent cervical cancer) and to other pursue other methods such as early detection and treatment of chronic infections that can lead to cancer.
Current data suggest that approximately 10% of all children with cancer have a predisposition because of genetic factors. Further research is needed to identify factors impacting cancer development in children.
WHO response
In 2018, WHO launched, with the support of St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, the
Global Initiative for Childhood Cancer
(Global Initiative), to
provide leadership and technical assistance to governments to support them in building and sustaining high-quality childhood cancer programmes. The goal is to achieve at least 60% survival for all children with cancer by 2030. This represents an approximate doubling of the current cure rate and will save an additional 1 million lives over the next decade.
The
CureAll framework
and its accompanying technical package have been developed to support implementation of the Initiative. The package helps governments and other stakeholders assess current capacity, set priorities, generate investment cases, develop evidence-based standards of care and monitor progress.
In December 2021, WHO and St Jude Children’s Research Hospital launched the
Global Platform for Access to Childhood Cancer Medicines
(Global Platform), the first of its kind, to provide an uninterrupted supply of quality-assured childhood cancer medicines with end-to-end support from selecting to dispensing medicines according to best possible care standards. The Global Platform synergizes with the Global Initiative, with activities implemented through this new effort expected to contribute substantially to the achievement of the initiative’s goals.
Fact sheets
Childhood cancer
Cancer
Initiatives and groups
Global initiative for childhood cancer
Global platform for access to childhood cancer medicines
Global accelerator for paediatric formulations network (GAP-f)
Resolutions and decisions
Cancer prevention and control in the context of an integrated approach (WHA70.12)
Technical work
Noncommunicable Diseases, Rehabilitation and Disability  (NCD)
News
All →
6 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO sets new global standard for child-friendly cancer drugs, paving way for industry innovation
11 February 2025
News release
WHO, St. Jude launch groundbreaking international delivery of
childhood cancer medicines
20 November 2024
Departmental update
Advancing access to better paediatric medicines on World Children’s Day
13 December 2021
Joint News Release
WHO and St. Jude to dramatically increase global access to childhood cancer medicines
Latest publications
All →
2 October 2025
Accelerating the development of priority formulations in childhood cancer: target product profiles for...
This document summarizes the proceedings and outcomes of a technical consultation designed to develop target product profiles for six priority childhood...
Download
Read More
20 November 2024
Accelerating optimal approval of priority formulations for antibiotic use in children: meetings report,...
On 24 March 2023, WHO launched the first-ever list of priority paediatric formulations for antibiotics, addressing critical gaps in age-appropriate treatments...
Download
Read More
13 November 2024
Accelerating research, development and access to paediatric medicines: Global accelerator for paediatric...
The GAP-f Phase 2 Progress Report highlights the network’s achievements and milestones from 2022 to 2024, providing a transparent overview of its...
Download
Read More
7 November 2024
Paediatric research and development landscape for neglected tropical diseases: Report on 1999–2022 period
Neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) are a diverse set of 21 diseases and disease groups that mainly affect resource-poor populations in tropical and subtropical...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
18 September 2023
WHO Global Initiative for Childhood Cancer on the path to bridging the Survival Gap and  attaining Universal...
The World Health Organization (WHO), alongside St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital (St. Jude) and global partners, launched the Global Initiative...
Download
Read More
23 September 2022
Global Accelerator for Paediatric Formulations 2022–2024 Business Plan
Launched in 2020, the
Global Accelerator for Paediatric Formulations (GAP-f) has catalysed the
response to the 2016 World Health Assembly Resolution...
Download
Read More
10 December 2020
WHO Global Initiative for Childhood Cancer: An Overview
Every day, more than 1000 children are diagnosed with cancer. This news sets all concerned on a demanding and life-changing journey. For children in high-income...
Download
Read More
2 November 2020
Global initiative for childhood cancer
Every day more than 1000 children are diagnosed with cancer. This represents a life-changing journey for families all over the world.  Childhood cancer...
Download
Read More
Our work
Improving the childhood cancer cure rate
Feature stories
All →
23 October 2024
Building equality into the health systems treating childhood cancer
17 May 2023
Delivering childhood cancer care in fragile and conflict settings: best practices from the occupied Palestine territory
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Core projects under the CureALL framework of the Global Initiative for Childhood Cancers
Videos
All →
11 February 2025
Childhood cancer medicines: WHO and St. Jude launch groundbreaking international platform for access
22 December 2021
Children with cancer: Global Platform for Access to Childhood Cancer Medicines
14 May 2021
Cancer - The Journey of Hope - 2021 GRAND PRIX of Better Health and Well-Being - WHO Film Festival
15 March 2019
After living through war and displacement in Syria, 11-year-old Mohammed is now battling cancer
Events
All →
Webinar: GAP-f private sector entities dialogue 2025
11 November 2025 13:00 – 16:00 CET
Webinar: Global Platform in action: how country-led collaboration is strengthening access to childhood cancer medicines
29 October 2025 14:00 – 15:30 CET
Webinar: Closing the gaps: raising awareness of the Global Platform for Access to Childhood Cancer Medicines
29 May 2025 16:00 – 17:30 CET
London Global Cancer Week – Joint WHO-IAEA-IARC session
11 November 2024 10:00 – 12:30 GMT
Related health topics
Non-communicable diseases
Cancer
Populations and demographics
Child health