Dementia
Skip to main content
Overview
Dementia is an umbrella term for several diseases affecting memory, other cognitive abilities and behaviour that interfere significantly with a person’s ability to maintain their activities of daily living. Although age is the strongest known risk factor for dementia, it is not a normal part of ageing.
WHO is working very closely with Member States and other relevant stakeholders to improve the lives of people with dementia and their carers, while decreasing the impact of dementia on communities and countries.
Prevalence
In 2021, 57 million people worldwide lived with dementia, with over 60% in low- and middle-income countries.
Every year, there are nearly 10 million new cases.
Dementia is one of the major causes of disability and dependency among older people worldwide. It can be overwhelming, not only for people who have dementia, but also for their carers and families, who globally provide the majority of care and support.
There is often a lack of awareness and understanding of dementia, resulting in stigmatization and barriers to diagnosis and care. The impact of dementia on carers, family and society at large can be physical, psychological, social and economic.
WHO response
WHO recognizes dementia as a public health priority. In May 2017, the World Health Assembly endorsed the
Global action plan on the public health response to dementia 2017-2025
. The global action plan aims to improve the lives of people with dementia, their families and carers, while decreasing the impact of dementia on communities and countries.
It provides a comprehensive blueprint for action across seven areas: (1) making dementia a public health priority, (2) increasing dementia awareness, inclusion and friendliness; (3) reducing the risk of dementia; (4) improving diagnosis, treatment and care; (5) supporting dementia carers, (6) enhancing health information systems for dementia and (7) fostering research and innovation.
Fact sheets
Dementia
Questions and answers
Information for caregivers
Databases and tools
Global Dementia Observatory
Resolutions and decisions
Draft global action plan on the public health response to dementia, Report by the Director-General (A70/28)
Technical work
Department of Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use
News
All →
14 October 2025
News release
11 million lives lost each year: urgent action needed on neurological care
31 March 2025
Departmental update
WHO calls for urgent action on dementia among refugees and migrants
23 October 2024
Departmental update
WHO publishes preferred product characteristics for blood tests for Alzheimer disease
9 July 2024
Departmental update
Public consultation of experts to join the Guideline Development Group (GDG) for updating WHO guidelines for risk reduction of cognitive decline and dementia
Latest publications
All →
31 March 2025
Dementia in refugees and migrants: epidemiology, public health implications and global responses
This is the sixth report of the Global Evidence Review on Health and Migration (GEHM) series. The publication examines the challenges faced by older refugees...
Download
Read More
23 October 2024
Preferred product characteristics of blood-based biomarker diagnostics for Alzheimer disease
Diagnosis is the first step into the care journey. To support a timely and accurate dementia diagnosis, it is critical to develop diagnostic tools, such...
Download
Read More
4 September 2023
Summary report on the Regional workshop on the implementation of the global action plan on the public...
This meeting report summarizes the key outcomes and conclusions of a regional dementia capacity building workshop that WHO organized with the support of...
Download
Read More
4 October 2022
A blueprint for dementia research
Research and innovation are integral parts of the global response to dementia. Yet, the  Global status report on the public health response to dementia...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Global status report on the public health response to dementia
Infographic
Caring for myself
Infographic
Ensuring that the person with dementia continues to receive care
Infographic
Providing everyday care to the person with dementia
Videos
All →
6 October 2021
The COVID-19 pandemic and mental health: Helen’s story - Ireland
16 November 2020
Supporting dementia carers: care about those who care for others
21 September 2020
Advice for caregivers of people with dementia during COVID-19
Podcast
Episode #122 - Dementia
Is Dementia a normal part of ageing? Someone suffers from dementia every three seconds. What are the causes? Can we prevent it? Is there a cure? Dr Katrin Seeher explains in Science in 5.
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Ageing
Health and wellbeing
Brain health
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases