In vitro diagnostics - Global
Skip to main content
Overview
In vitro diagnostics (IVDs) are tests that can detect disease, conditions and infections. In vitro simply means ‘in glass’, meaning these tests are typically conducted in test tubes and similar equipment, as opposed to in vivo tests, which are conducted in the body itself. In vitro tests may be done in laboratories, health care facilities or even in the home. The tests themselves can be performed on a variety of instruments ranging from small, handheld tests to complex laboratory instruments. They allow doctors to diagnose patients effectively and work to provide appropriate treatments.
Diagnosis is a driver of patient, financial and health systems impact, and a critical enabler of universal health coverage, but it is also the weakest link in the care cascade. This is especially true in primary healthcare settings in low- and middle-income countries. These countries often lack an integrated network of laboratories used for such diagnosis; however, broad set of IVDs is available for testing patients in the primary care setting where laboratories are not available.
Impact
Over 40 000 products are available today for in vitro diagnostic testing, covering a wide range of conditions. These include traditional laboratory-based tests, with samples being sent to a central laboratory for analysis, and point-of-care tests, which can be performed near, or at, the point of patient care. Point-of-care testing can help optimize treatment decision-making, avoid referrals, improve the efficiency of care and decrease costs, especially in resource-constrained settings where laboratory infrastructure is weak.
Diagnostic tests are increasingly important around the world as a first defence against the spread of many diseases. The fight against tuberculosis, for example, replies on modern diagnostics as a prerequisite for the early, rapid and accurate detection of the disease and changes in drug resistance used in its treatment.
In vitro diagnostics are also the first line of defence against the possibility of the re-emergence of eradicated diseases. Smallpox, for example, is unlikely to reappear; however, WHO maintains a network of partnerships around the world dedicated to the rapid diagnosis and containment of any potential cases.
WHO response
Access to good quality, affordable, and appropriate health products is indispensable to advance universal health coverage, address health emergencies, and promote healthier populations – the three strategic priorities of the World Health Organization (WHO) Thirteenth General Programme of Work 2019–2023.
To ensure the quality of diagnosis for priority diseases, the WHO prequalification team evaluates the safety and performance of a number of diagnostic tests according to international standards. Tests found to meet the required criteria are listed on a public web site and eligible for procurement by UN and international procurement agencies. Countries may also use the prequalification list to purchase diagnostics.
The WHO procurement service for in vitro diagnostics was established in 1990 to facilitate Member States' access to high quality HIV test kits at a reasonable cost. Over the years, the service has expanded to include diagnostics for HIV/AIDS, malaria, hepatitis B and hepatitis C, as well as basic laboratory consumables and equipment.
The WHO also develops and updates the WHO Model List of Essential in vitro Diagnostics (EDL), a list of recommended in vitro diagnostic tests (IVDs) for  point of care in the community and for laboratory,  that should be available in every country. The EDL provides guidance based on the latest evidence, to countries for creating or updating their national lists of essential IVDs.
Databases and tools
WHO list of prequalified in vitro diagnostic products
Initiatives and groups
Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on In Vitro Diagnostics
Resolutions and decisions
WHA67.20: Regulatory system strengthening for medical products
WHA63.12: Availability, safety and quality of blood products
WHA76.5Strengthening diagnostics capacity
WHA75(25) Standardization of medical devices nomenclature
Technical work
Regulation and Prequalification
Health product and policy standards
Selection, access and use of in vitro diagnostics
Quality assurance of in vitro diagnostics
News
All →
9 May 2025
Joint News Release
WHO and Medicines Patent Pool announce sublicensing agreement for rapid diagnostic test technology
5 April 2024
News release
Global deployment of rapid diagnostic tests to boost fight against cholera
19 October 2023
News release
WHO releases new list of essential diagnostics; new recommendations for hepatitis E virus tests, personal use glucose meters
28 September 2020
News release
Global partnership to make available 120 million affordable, quality COVID-19 rapid tests for low- and middle-income countries
Videos
All →
28 January 2021
What is the WHO EDL for a better access to diagnostics?
28 January 2021
The importance of diagnostics and the EDL
28 January 2021
Developing a national EDL for a better access to diagnostics
Publications
All →
24 February 2023
Target product profile for readers of rapid diagnostic tests
Lateral-flow rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) continue to play a vital role in global health in the management
and diagnosis of infectious diseases, including...
Download
Read More
18 October 2023
The selection and use of essential in vitro diagnostics: report of the fourth meeting of the WHO Strategic...
The Technical report of the fourth meeting of the WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on In Vitro Diagnostics, 2022 (including the fourth WHO model...
Download
Read More
30 July 2021
Selection of essential in vitro diagnostics at country level: using the WHO Model List of Essential In...
This document intends to provide guidance to countries on methods for developing and updating national lists of essential in vitro diagnostics (NEDL)....
Download
Read More
20 June 2021
Guidance for post-market surveillance and market surveillance of medical devices, including in vitro...
Post-market surveillance is a set of activities conducted by manufacturers, to collect and evaluate experience gained from medical devices that have...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
15 May 2025
Interview with Dr Jicui Dong, Head of the Secretariat of the World Local
Production...
Download
Read More
Our work
A diagnosis is the first step to getting effective treatment
Discover the WHO Model List of Essential in vitro diagnostics (EDL) and improve health in your country.
Download infographic
Electronic WHO Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics
eEDL beta version
Feature stories
All →
26 January 2023
Syria takes steps to advance polio transition while strengthening essential health priorities
19 January 2023
Donors making a difference: building skills, building capacity
19 December 2022
Donors making a difference in 2022
8 January 2020
Expansion of the prequalification of in vitro diagnostics scope
Events
All →
Global Forum for Public Procurement of Health Products
4 – 7 November 2025
Fifth WHO Global Forum on Medical Devices
2 – 4 June 2025
Open session day - 5th Meeting of the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on IVDs
25 November 2024 08:30 – 13:00 CET
Commentaries
8 April 2020
Advice on the use of point-of-care immunodiagnostic tests for COVID-19
Calls
2 October 2024
Call for consultation
Call for public comments - Applications to the Fifth WHO model list of essential in vitro diagnostics (EDL5)
20 March 2024
Call for submissions
Call for submission - Submissions for the fifth WHO model list of essential in vitro diagnostics (EDL 5)
Required information for prequalifications
Guidance for Manufacturers
Guidance for Regulatory agencies
Guidance for Evaluating laboratories
Guidance for Procurement agencies
Newsletter
Q2 2025, Issue 49
Q1 2025, Issue 48
Issues 31 to 46
In vitro diagnostics - Prequal
Related links
International Federation of Biomedical Laboratory Science – IFBLS
The International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine – IFCC
World Association of Societies of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine – WASPaLM
More information on in vitro diagnostics
Emergency use listing procedure
Related health topics
Substances
Biologicals
Physiological interventions
Blood products
Health systems
Blood transfusion safety
Health interventions
Diagnostics
Health interventions
Medical devices
Health interventions
Medicines
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization