Emergency care
Skip to main content
Overview
All around the world, acutely ill and injured people seek care every day. First contact health workers manage children and adults with medical, surgical and obstetric emergencies, including injuries, sepsis, heart attacks and strokes, asthma and acute complications of pregnancy.
Many proven health interventions are time dependent. Emergency care is an integrated platform for delivering accessible, quality and time-sensitive health care services for acute illness and injury across the life course. Integrated emergency care services facilitate timely recognition, treatment management and, when needed, continued treatment of the acutely ill at the appropriate level of the health system.
Critical care is an ongoing, intensive treatment provided to patients with life-threatening illnesses or injuries that require close, constant monitoring and support. Care is typically delivered in critical care units (e.g. intensive care units or high dependency units). Critically ill patients often need advanced medical equipment and therapies, intravenous medications to support heart function or blood pressure, and continuous monitoring of vital signs.
Over half of deaths and over a third of disability in low- and middle-income countries could be addressed by the implementation of effective emergency and critical care. Prioritizing an integrated approach to early recognition, resuscitation, treatment and prevention of complications from acute conditions reduces the morbidity and mortality from a wide range of diseases across the life course.
Impact
The recent pandemic has revealed pervasive gaps in the provision of emergency and critical care and reinforced the need for an integrated approach to these services. Emergency and critical care are pivotal service delivery platforms of health systems, and have an essential role in saving lives, reducing disabilities, and preventing complications.
Especially when there are logistical or financial barriers to healthcare access, people may present for care only when symptomatic with acute illness or injury. Emergency care is powerfully aligned with the primary health care agenda as it provides first contact clinical care for those who are acutely ill or injured. Pre-hospital and facility-based emergency care is a high impact and cost-effective form of secondary prevention. Ongoing critical care ensures adequate monitoring, reassessment and continuing comprehensive treatment to maximize patient outcomes.
Emergency and critical care play an important role in public health. Disease surveillance at facilities delivering emergency and critical care is essential to guide primary prevention and outbreak response. Building capacity for emergency and critical care is the vital foundation for the health systems ability to surge during larger scale health emergencies such as conflict, natural disaster or outbreaks of epidemic disease.
WHO response
The Seventy-sixth World Health Assembly called on WHO to prioritize integrated emergency, critical and operative care for universal health coverage (UHC) and protection from health emergencies (WHA 76.2).
WHO is dedicated to assisting countries to strengthen their emergency and critical care systems to ensure quality everyday clinical care and robust responses during times of crisis. Through collaborative efforts and partnerships, WHO advocates for the integration of emergency and critical care into national healthcare agendas, emphasizing the importance of building national capacities to enhance clinical service readiness, preparedness and resilience. This includes working closely with partner agencies within the UN system to ensure that emergency and critical care are appropriately represented in UHC packages and planning and disaster readiness and response.
WHO’s work plan on emergency and critical care encompasses various facets, including advocacy, policy and planning, assessment at system level and health facility level, clinical learning programmes, clinical process tools and improvement of clinical care. WHO's Clinical Services and System Unit is dedicated to strengthening health systems to deliver emergency and critical care, particularly in first contact locations, and to supporting the development of quality, timely emergency and critical care accessible to all.
Fact sheets
Injuries and violence
Road traffic injuries
Sepsis
Maternal mortality
Snakebite envenoming
Databases and tools
WHO-ICRC Basic Emergency Care Course
WHO emergency care system framework
WHO Emergency Care Toolkit
Prehospital Toolkit
Mass Casualty Management
Interagency Integrated Triage Tool
WHO Clinical Registry
Initiatives and groups
Acute Care Action Network
Global Alliance for Care of the Injured (GACI)
Emergency Care Saves Lives - 25x25
United Nations Road Safety Collaboration
Resolutions and decisions
Development of a global strategy and action plan for integrated emergency, critical and operative care, 2026–2035 (Resolution 77.8)
Integrated
emergency, critical and operative care for universal health coverage
and protection from health emergencies (Resolution WHA76.2)
Emergency care systems for universal health coverage (WHA72.16)
Strengthening emergency and essential surgical care and anaesthesia as a component of universal health coverage (WHA68.15)
Emergency-care systems (WHA60.22)
Technical work
Integrated health services
Clinical services and systems
News
All →
24 May 2025
Departmental update
Progress on emergency, critical and operative care
20 May 2025
Departmental update
Strengthening acute care systems saves lives, but urgent action is needed
25 October 2024
Departmental update
First meeting of the Acute Care Action Network
9 October 2024
Departmental update
Hybrid learning to scale up delivery of Basic Emergency Care training in Rwanda
Latest publications
All 	→
15 September 2025
Prehospital emergency care - operational guidance for ambulance systems
WHO’s Prehospital emergency care - operational guidance for ambulance systems provides detail on several key components of effective prehospital...
Download
Read More
25 November 2024
Standards and recommendations for burns care in mass casualty incidents
Caring for burns patients from the incident scene to definitive treatment can be a complex, resource-consuming process with the potential to overwhelm...
Download
Read More
2 October 2024
Adapting emergency care guidance for better outcomes
Download
Read More
12 July 2024
High-priority Health services for Humanitarian response (H3 package)
The H3 Package defines a set of prioritized health interventions that can feasibly be delivered to populations affected by humanitarian crises during protracted...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
12 November 2025
Public Health Situation Analysis - oPt
The fragile Gaza ceasefire announced on 9 October 2025 marked a momentous but precarious juncture in the ongoing conflict.3 The ceasefire remains in place...
Download
Read More
26 September 2025
Public Health Situation Analysis - Cabo Verde Hurricane Erin
Hurricane Erin, born as a tropical wave off West Africa on 9 August, became the first Atlantic hurricane of the year a week later as it tracked west, undergoing...
Download
Read More
10 September 2025
Public Health Situation Analysis - occupied Palestinian territory-September
Starvation and malnutrition in Gaza are at the highest levels ever since the conflict began almost two years ago. Deliberate blocking and delay of large-scale...
Download
Read More
28 August 2025
Public Health Situation Analysis - Afghanistan
In 2025, an estimated 22.9 million people in Afghanistan ─ nearly half of the country’s 46 million population ─ require humanitarian assistance....
Download
Read More
Our work
Accessing essential health services in fragile, conflict-affected and vulnerable settings
Improving care of the injured
Health workforce education and training
Mulitmedia
All →
19 September 2025
Emergency care and the Acute Care Transformation initiative
23 June 2025
WHO Clinical Registry – Emergency Care
23 June 2025
WHO Clinical Registry – Trauma Care
23 June 2025
Introduction to WHO Clinical Registry
Related health topics
Health systems
Patient safety
Health systems
Quality of care
Physical environment
Road traffic injuries