Ethics
Skip to main content
Overview
Ethical questions related to health, health care, and public health cover topics as diverse as moral issues around reproduction, state obligations in the provision of health care services, and appropriate measures to control infectious disease. Scholars and health care professionals have debated ethical questions related to health and health care since the earliest days of medicine. Recent formal efforts to articulate international standards of ethics applicable to health and health care can
be traced to the Nuremberg trials of 1947, during which the horrors of Nazi medical experiments came to light.
The principles that emerged from those trials, known as the Nuremberg Code, are broadly applicable to many types of health-related research involving
human participants, including clinical trials. The growing breadth and complexity of contemporary health challenges have produced a range of difficult questions that cannot always be adequately addressed by relying exclusively on existing policies,
guidelines or codes of conduct. Debates over access to new and expensive pharmaceuticals and medical technologies, as well as increasing awareness of the gross health disparities that exist both within and between countries, have called attention to the
need for an ethics of health policy and practice.
Research
Research ethics govern the standards of conduct for scientific researchers. It is important to adhere to ethical principles in order to protect the dignity, rights and welfare of research participants.
The WHO Manual (Section XV.2) defines research with human subjects as 'any social science, biomedical, behavioural, or epidemiological activity that entails systematic collection or analysis of data with the intent to generate new knowledge, in which human beings:
are exposed to manipulation, intervention, observation, or other interaction with investigators either directly or through alteration of their environment; or
become individually identifiable through investigator's collection, preparation, or use of biological material or medical or other records.
Infectious diseases
Immunization
raises a host of challenging ethical questions that researchers, governments, funders, pharmaceutical companies, and communities must confront.
TB
: Ethical issues include questions about the equitable distribution of resources, protection of vulnerable groups, respect for patient choice of treatment options and solidarity between communities during outbreaks.
Zika
has raised many specific ethical issues, in particular regarding pregnancy. At the same time, it has highlighted ethical issues that arise in
vector-borne diseases
more generally.
The
HIV
epidemic has raised many ethical challenges for public health officials, researchers and clinicians, reaching from macro-level policy to micro-level clinical decisions.
Questions and answers
Questions and answers about ethics
Ethics and COVID-19: resource allocation and priority setting
Databases and tools
Human Genome Editing (HGE) Registry
Initiatives and groups
Expert Group on Ethics and Governance of Artificial Intelligence for Health
ACT-Accelerator Ethics & Governance Working Group
Expert Advisory Committee on Developing Global Standards for Governance and Oversight of Human Genome Editing
Global Network of WHO Collaborating Centres for Bioethics
Global Summit of National Bioethics Committees
Public Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Ethics Network (PHEPREN)
Public Health Ethics Consultative Group
Research Ethics Review Committee (ERC)
WHO Expert Group on Ethics & Governance of Infectious Disease Outbreaks and other Emergencies
Working Group on Developing WHO Guidance on Clinical Ethics
Technical work
Health Ethics & Governance
Ethics and COVID-19
News
All →
18 January 2024
News release
WHO releases AI ethics and governance guidance for large multi-modal models
11 December 2023
Departmental update
New Technical Advisory Group on Embedding Ethics in Health and Climate Change Policy (TAG-Ethics & Climate Health)
25 September 2023
Departmental update
Launch of WHO tool for benchmarking ethics oversight of health-related research involving human participants
10 February 2023
Departmental update
WHO kicks off deliberations on ethical framework and tools for social listening and infodemic management
Publications
All 	→
19 June 2017
WHO guidelines on ethical issues in public health surveillance
This document outlines 17 ethical guidelines that can assist everyone involved in public health surveillance, including officials in government agencies,...
Download
Read More
22 July 2025
Key criteria for the ethical acceptability of controlled human infection studies during public health...
Controlled human infection studies (CHIS) involve the intentional infection of volunteers with pathogens, including those that cause epidemics or pandemics....
Download
Read More
23 June 2025
The ethics of health research priority setting
The resources available for health research at any given time – including money but also time, infrastructure and personnel – are scarce. Not...
Download
Read More
23 June 2025
WHO guidance on the ethics of health research priority setting
The resources available for health research at any given time – including money but also time, infrastructure and personnel – are scarce. Not...
Download
Read More
8 April 2025
Social listening in infodemic management for public health emergencies: guidance on ethical considerations
This guidance document has been developed by the World Health Organization (WHO) to guide governments, organizations and individuals seeking advice on...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Developing normative guidance to address ethical challenges in global health
Framing the ethics of public health surveillance
Building ethics capacity
Engaging the global community in health ethics
Supporting countries to manage ethical issues during outbreaks and emergencies
Ensuring ethical standards and procedures for research with human beings
Videos
All →
11 April 2025
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: social listening in infodemic management for public health emergencies
27 October 2022
Has the decolonizing global health agenda been colonized?
6 December 2021
WHO Pandemic Ethics & Policy Summit: Prof David Archer, Chairperson of Nuffield Council on Bioethics
6 December 2021
WHO Pandemic Ethics & Policy Summit: Dr Fifa A Rahman, Civil Society Representative
Partners
UN-Interagency Committee
Country Coordinating Mechanism - The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
Quiz
The ethics of public health surveillance
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
HIV
Other
Human genome editing
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization