Health taxes
Skip to main content
Overview
Health taxes are levied on products that have a negative public health impact, for example tobacco, alcohol and sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs). These taxes are considered win-win-win policies because they save lives and prevent disease while advancing health equity and mobilising revenue for the general budget. They can also be used for specific priorities such as financing universal health coverage (UHC) or highly cost-effective yet underutilised population health measures.
The aim of health tax policy is to reduce the consumption of products deemed risk factors for noncommunicable diseases by making them less affordable through higher prices. This is achieved with regular tax increases large enough to result in real price increases greater than economic growth.
Excise taxes are the most effective tax measure for promoting health because they change the price a harmful product relative to other goods and can be easily increased over time.
Consumption is reduced best with taxes based on the quantity (known as specific taxes) of an unhealthy product (such as packs of cigarettes) or its unhealthy ingredient (such as pure alcohol or sugar) rather than taxes based on the product’s value.
Impact
Raising health taxes is a SMART policy because it:
S
aves lives
Tobacco, alcohol and sugar-sweetened beverages taxes are all effective and cost-effective ways of reducing consumption, preventing diseases and injuries and saving lives.
M
obilises revenue
Health taxes can be a revenue booster over the short and medium term. Importantly, health taxation is also more inclusive and pro-growth than alternative sources of revenue.
ddresses health inequities
In lower- and middle-income countries, lower socioeconomic status is associated with higher risk of noncommunicable diseases and higher rates of tobacco use and alcohol consumption. Accordingly, the net impact of health taxes is progressive once one fully accounts for the distribution of health benefits, income losses averted and reductions in catastrophic healthcare costs.
R
educes burdens on health systems
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure: health taxes are also a high-return investment in averted healthcare expenditure and increased workforce participation.
T
argets noncommunicable disease risk factors for the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals.
By targeting noncommunicable disease risk factors with health taxes, countries can progress their achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 3.4, which calls for a one-third reduction of premature mortality from noncommunicable diseases by 2030.
WHO response
Countries are increasingly interested in using health taxes to achieve their health, revenue and equity objectives but require assistance with framing, designing, implementing and administering these measures. WHO’s response leverages its unique methodological expertise, technical capacity and country-level relationships established over more than a decade of work on tobacco taxation.
WHO divides its response into three interconnected areas of work.
Technical assistance
to help governments seeking to adopt, reform or evaluate health tax measures. This tailored assistance helps Member States address challenges raised by providing, for example, tax system diagnostics, country-specific modelling for the impact of health tax reforms and independent evaluations of industry arguments.
Capacity building
engages regulators and policymakers on an ongoing basis in their framing and prioritisation of health taxes including the development of plans for progressing, implementing and evaluating health tax policies.
Global goods
build on the latest evidence base to support country level work by defining best practices, guiding policy development, detailing technical requirements and providing data to support and benchmark policy progress.
Fact sheets
Tobacco
Healthy diet
Obesity and overweight
Sugars and dental caries
Alcohol
Databases and tools
Health taxes database
The Global Health Observatory - Excise tax on alcoholic beverages
The Global Health Observatory - Raise taxes on tobacco
Initiatives and groups
The 3 by 35 Initiative
Resolutions and decisions
Outcome of the Second International Conference on Nutrition: report by the Director-General (WHA 72/58)
The action plan (2022–2030) to effectively implement the global strategy to reduce the harmful use of alcohol as a public health priority (EB150/7 Add.1)
Report of the Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity: implementation plan (WHA70.19)
Preparation for the third High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases, to be held in 2018 (WHA70.11)
Global strategy to reduce the harmful use of alcohol (WHA63.13)
Prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases: implementation of the global strategy (WHA61.14)
WHO Framework convention on tobacco control (WHA56.1)
Technical work
Health promotion
Fiscal policies for health
Health systems governance and financing
Mental health and substance abuse
Nutrition and food safety
Noncommunicable diseases, rehabilitation and disability
News
All →
16 July 2025
Departmental update
Ethiopia takes bold strides on health taxes to drive Universal Health Coverage
2 July 2025
News release
WHO launches bold push to raise health taxes and save millions of lives
5 December 2023
Departmental update
WHO calls on countries to increase taxes on alcohol and sugary sweetened beverages
13 December 2022
Departmental update
WHO calls on countries to tax sugar-sweetened beverages to save lives
Our work
All →
Addressing the political economy of health financing reform
Controlling the global obesity epidemic
Raising taxes on tobacco
Latest publications
All →
5 August 2025
Hospital services costing study - Chhattisgarh
This report explores the potential for instituting routine cost data collection within the State Nodal Agency in Chhattisgarh.
Download
Read More
5 December 2023
Global report on the use of alcohol taxes, 2023
This report provides an assessment of taxes applied to alcoholic beverages at the global level. It qualitatively compares their design and provides estimates...
Download
Read More
5 December 2023
Global report on the use of sugar-sweetened beverage taxes, 2023
This report provides a global assessment of taxes applied to sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs). It describes and qualitatively compares their design and...
Download
Read More
5 December 2023
WHO technical manual on alcohol tax policy and administration ﻿
The WHO technical manual on alcohol tax policy and
administration is a practical guide and a call to action for policymakers
and others involved...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
29 January 2025
UHC-Partnership: Kyrgyzstan controls the prices of essential medicines in pursuit of health for all
Videos
All →
5 May 2021
Tobacco Taxes: Averting death and promoting inclusive growth post-COVID-19
Events
All →
5 December 2023 15:00 – 16:30 CET
New WHO resources to address the burdens of alcohol consumption through taxation
Related health topics
Other
Alcohol
Health systems
Health financing
Health systems
Health systems governance
Human behaviour
Healthy diet
Substances
Tobacco
Other
Universal health coverage