Oxygen
Skip to main content
Overview
Oxygen is a life-saving
essential medicine
with no substitution. Healthcare professionals use oxygen to treat respiratory illnesses like
COVID-19
and
pneumonia
. Oxygen is also essential for
surgery
and trauma. Vulnerable groups like
older people
,
pregnant women
,
young infants and
newborns
need oxygen therapy regularly.
Despite being an essential medicine, oxygen is a complex product. Medicinal oxygen is produced in an industrial process applying good manufacturing practices (GMP) or is generated on-site using oxygen concentrators, which are in many legislations regulated as medical devices. Oxygen also requires a whole system to safely reach patients.
Due to their complexity, access to medical oxygen meets many challenges on availability, quality, affordability, management, supply, human resources capacity and safety. In face of these challenges, WHO continuously develops resources and tools to overcome them.
Impact
Surveys in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) have found that fewer
than half of all health facilities have uninterrupted access to oxygen. It has
been reported that the lack of access to reliable oxygen supplies contributes
to preventable deaths, particularly in LMICs. For example, it has been
estimated that up to 122 000 deaths from childhood pneumonia could be prevented
annually with the strengthening of oxygen supplies. Numerous studies show that
oxygen access is a global problem. For example, a recent study found that among
facilities treating respiratory infections in sub-Saharan Africa, only 1 in 5
had oxygen in Mauritania and 1 in 10 in Niger. Surveys by the United States
Agency for International Development found similar situations for countries in
South America and South Asia. A serious concern at any time, the global medical
oxygen problem has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Despite being an essential medicine, producing oxygen that is safe for
patient use is a complex process since it requires the devices and systems
needed to deliver oxygen to patients, ranging from pulse oximeters to
ventilators, and health workers that are trained to use such devices
effectively. However daunting, the investment of time and resources required to
meet oxygen supply demand is worth it. The support for the urgent scale-up of
medicinal oxygen will save lives by improving care for people with COVID-19,
severe pneumonia and other conditions needing oxygen therapy.
WHO Response
The
Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator
, launched in 2020, supported assessment of oxygen needs in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), and supported funding to increase access to medical oxygen. This was followed in 2023 by the
World Health Assembly resolution on Increasing access to medical oxygen
, which urges Member States to enhance access with WHO support.
WHO supports Member States to improve access to medical oxygen by:
deployment of oxygen systems through direct logistical and technical support;
providing technical guidance to clinical and biomedical engineering professionals (such as
technical specifications
, and
foundations of medical oxygen systems
);
education and training in the appropriate selection, procurement, maintenance, and use of
medical devices
;
supporting
research to ensure oxygen is most effectively used for patient benefit
; and
development of tools which enable forecasting and decisions
related to existing and future oxygen systems.
Fact sheets
Pneumonia in children
The top 10 causes of death
Questions and answers
Oxygen
Databases and tools
COVID-19 Essential Supplies Forecasting Tool (COVID-ESFT)
Continuity of essential health services: Facility assessment tool
Oxygen therapy for children: A manual for health workers
Initiatives and groups
Oxygen Access Scale-Up
Resolutions and decisions
WHA68.15 Strengthening emergency and essential surgical care and anaesthesia as a component of universal health coverage
WHA76.3 Increasing access to medical oxygen
Training
Clinical Management
Clinical management of patients with COVID-19: Initial approach to the acutely ill patient
Clinical management of patients with COVID-19: Investigations and care for mild, moderate and severe disease
Technical work
Health product and policy standards
Access to assistive technology & medical devices
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health, and Ageing
Medical use of oxygen
Publications
All →
5 February 2025
National medical oxygen scale-up plan: Development guidance
In line with WHA resolution 76.3 Increasing access to medical oxygen, WHO, Member States and partners, co-developed a guidance to strengthen the medical...
Download
Read More
31 December 2024
WHO Technical specifications for health facility based medical oxygen systems
The Clinical Management and Operations Unit (Country Readiness Strengthening Department) in collaboration with the Medical Devices and Diagnostics Unit...
Download
Read More
10 December 2024
National oxygen scale-up framework: road to oxygen access: meeting report, Dakar, Senegal, 14–16 May...
The World Health Organization (WHO) convened a meeting in Dakar, Senegal, from May 14 to 16, 2024 to produce a template for developing evidence-based,...
Download
Read More
8 March 2024
Summary of WHO symposium on meeting the global needs for oxygen and respiratory care
Global access to oxygen and options to deliver respiratory support are limited, and patient needs in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) are unmet....
Download
Read More
Feature stories
20 May 2021
Oxygen saves lives in Somalia on the path to UHC
25 February 2021
The life-saving power of medical oxygen
3 July 2020
South Sudan: WHO and UK provide oxygen concentrators to support the  fight against COVID
2 July 2020
Iraq: WHO provides support to bridge shortfall in oxygen supplies
Events
All →
Special webinar: Oxygen scale-up initiatives
13 February 2025 13:30 – 15:00 CET
WHO virtual workshop series for developing national medical oxygen scale-up plans
26 November 2024 – 30 June 2025
Webinar: The crucial role of oxygen in global health
2 October 2024 13:30 – 14:30 CET
National Oxygen Scale-Up Framework Meeting: Road to Oxygen Access
14 – 16 May 2024
Multimedia
All →
2 October 2024
WHO World Oxygen Day webinar: The crucial rule of oxygen in global health – 2 October 2024
21 April 2022
Medical equipment training – How to get a pulse oximeter ready for use
21 April 2022
Medical equipment training – How to get an oxygen concentrator ready for use
1 March 2022
Medical equipment training – How to clinically use a CPAP machine
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
Health systems
Hospitals
Populations and demographics
Maternal health
Health interventions
Medical devices
Populations and demographics
Newborn health
Diseases and conditions
Pneumonia
Diseases and conditions
Tuberculosis