Snakebite
Skip to main content
Overview
Snakebite envenoming is a potentially life-threatening disease caused by toxins in the bite of a venomous snake. Envenoming can also be caused by having venom sprayed into the eyes by certain species of snakes that have the ability to spit venom as a defence measure.
Inadequate past efforts to control snakebite envenoming has produced fragmented, inaccurate epidemiological data. Many victims do not attend health centres or hospitals and instead rely on traditional treatments. However, available data show 4.5–5.4 million people get bitten by snakes annually. Of this, 1.8–2.7 million develop clinical illness and 81 000 to 138 000 die from complications.
High-risk groups include rural agricultural workers, herders, fishermen, hunters, working children, people living in poorly constructed houses and those with limited access to education and healthcare. Morbidity and mortality occur most frequently among young people and children suffer higher case fatality. Furthermore, women experience increased barriers to accessing medical care in some cultures and pregnant women are extremely vulnerable.
An ongoing crisis restricting access to safe, effective antivenom treatment in many regions, and particularly sub-Saharan Africa, is one factor that contributes to the predisposition for seeking help through traditional medicine.
Symptoms
Bites or sprayed venom from venomous snakes can cause a range of acute and serious medical emergencies. Envenoming from different types of snakes can cause different symptoms, some more serious than others. This makes the preparation of correct antivenoms an ongoing problem. Envenoming can cause severe paralysis that may prevent breathing, making immediate medical attention critical. People may also experience bleeding disorders that can lead to fatal haemorrhages or irreversible kidney failure. Severe local tissue destruction may also occur, which can lead to permanent disability and even limb amputation. Children are at higher risk of severe effects due to lower body mass than adults.
Most deaths and serious consequences from snake bites are entirely preventable by making safe and effective antivenoms more widely available and accessible, particularly in high-risk areas. High quality snake antivenoms are the only effective treatment to prevent or reverse most of the venomous effects of snake bites.
Treatment
Snake antivenoms are effective treatments to prevent or reverse most of the harmful effects of snakebite envenoming and are included in the WHO list of essential medicines. The availability and accessibility of these antivenoms, along with raising awareness on primary prevention methods among communities and health workers, are the best ways to limit serious consequences and deaths from snakebite envenoming.
After a bite by a snake suspected of being venomous, follow these steps:
Immediately move away from the area where the bite occurred.
Remove anything tight from around the bitten part of the body to avoid harm if swelling occurs.
Reassure the victim, as most venomous snake bites do not cause immediate death.
Immobilize the person completely and transport the person to a health facility as soon as possible
Applying pressure at the bite site with a pressure pad may be suitable in some cases.
Avoid traditional first aid methods or herbal medicines.
Paracetamol may be given for local pain (which can be severe).
Vomiting may occur, so place the person on their left side in the recovery position.
Closely monitor airway and breathing and be ready to resuscitate if necessary
Fact sheets
Snakebite envenoming
Questions and answers
What should you know about snakebite envenoming?
Databases and tools
Snakebite Information and Data Platform
Antivenom risk-benefit assessment
Resolutions and decisions
Addressing the burden of snakebite envenoming, 2017
| WHA71.5
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
Science in 5
Episode #125 - Snakebites: Life saving facts
20 September 2024 | Did you know that one person dies every four minutes from snakebite? What should you do if you get bitten? Dr David Williams talks about prevention and treatment in Science in 5.
Highlights
Target product profiles for animal plasma-derived antivenoms: antivenoms for treatment of snakebite envenoming in south Asia
Snakebite Information  and Data Platform – Engaging and empowering communities
Risk Assessment  – Snake antivenom | WHO – Prequalification of Medical Products
News
All →
1 September 2024
Departmental update
Better snakebite data needed to save lives and limbs
12 January 2024
Departmental update
Snakebite and climate change:
a call for urgent action to future-proof a neglected tropical disease
23 June 2023
Departmental update
First WHO guidance on snakebite treatments published
5 February 2023
Departmental update
Regional Action Plan for prevention and control of snakebite envenoming in South-East Asia 2022–2030 published in New Delhi
Our work
Addressing antivenoms issues
Leading the way to improved treatments for snakebite envenoming
Improving treatment for snakebite patients
Preventing and controlling snakebite envenoming
Publications
All →
8 August 2025
A dual battle: rabies and snakebite envenoming in South-East Asia
Weekly epidemiological record
Download
Read More
20 December 2024
Progress in snakebite envenoming
data reporting: challenges and
opportunities
BackgroundSnakebite envenoming represents a critical yet neglected
global health issue, disproportionately affecting impoverished, rural populations...
Download
Read More
1 August 2024
Target product profiles for animal plasma-derived antivenoms: antivenoms for treatment of snakebite envenoming...
We describe here WHO public-benefit Target Product Profiles (TPPs) for antivenoms intended to be used for treatment of snakebite envenoming in South Asia,...
Download
Read More
External Publications
All →
Effect of distance and delay in access to care on outcome of snakebite in rural north-eastern Nigeria
Effect of distance and delay in access to care on outcome of snakebite in rural north-eastern Nigeria
Rural and Remote Health 2015; 15: 3496
Consequences of neglect: analysis of the sub-Saharan African snake antivenom market and the global context
Consequences of neglect: analysis of the sub-Saharan African snake antivenom market and the global context
PLOS Neglected tropical diseases, June 5, 2012
Events
All →
19 September 2025
International Snakebite Awareness Day 2025 (ISBAD ’25)
Calls for
Permanent call
22 February 2020
Call for experts
Call for experts ̶ Snakebite envenoming: call for nomination from experts to serve on Roster of Experts
Other call(s)
12 August 2025
Call for experts
Call for Experts − Technical Advisory Group on Snake Antivenom Immunoglobulin Listing (TAG-SAIL)
Multimedia
All →
Infographic
Disabilities from snakebite envenoming: The hidden Crisis
Infographic
Disabilities from snakebite envenoming: The hidden Crisis
Feature story
6 May 2019
Community engagement drives snakebite control in Eswatini
Photo gallery
Snakes gallery
Twelve snakes responsible for a majority of snakebites around the world
Contacts
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr Bernadette Abela-Ridder
Technical officer
abelab@who.int
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications
Results for (PubMed)
snake bites
or
snakebites
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Echinococcosis
Diseases and conditions
Rabies
Diseases and conditions
Taeniasis and cysticercosis