Air pollution
Skip to main content
Overview
Air pollution is contamination of the indoor or outdoor environment by any chemical, physical or biological agent that modifies the natural characteristics of the atmosphere.
Household combustion devices, motor vehicles, industrial facilities and forest fires are common sources of air pollution. Pollutants of major public health concern include particulate matter, carbon monoxide, ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide. Outdoor and indoor air pollution cause respiratory and other diseases and are important sources of morbidity and mortality.
WHO data show that almost all of the global population (99%) breathe air that exceeds
WHO guideline limits
and contains high levels of
pollutants
, with low- and middle-income countries suffering from the highest exposures.
Air quality is closely linked to the earth’s climate and ecosystems globally. Many of the drivers of air pollution (i.e. combustion of fossil fuels) are also sources of greenhouse gas emissions. Policies to reduce air pollution, therefore, offer a win-win strategy for both climate and health, lowering the burden of disease attributable to air pollution, as well as contributing to the near- and long-term mitigation of climate change.
Impact
From smog hanging over cities to smoke inside the home, air pollution poses a major
threat to health
and climate.
Ambient (outdoor) air pollution in both cities and rural areas is causing fine particulate matter which result in strokes, heart diseases, lung cancer, acute and chronic respiratory diseases.
Additionally, around 2.4 billion people are exposed to dangerous levels of household air pollution, while using polluting open fires or simple stoves for cooking fuelled by kerosene, biomass (wood, animal dung and crop waste) and coal.
The combined effects of ambient air pollution and household air pollution is associated with 7 million premature deaths annually.
Sources of air pollution are multiple and context specific. The major outdoor pollution sources include residential energy for cooking and heating, vehicles, power generation, agriculture/waste incineration, and industry. Policies and investments that support sustainable land use, cleaner household energy and transport, energy-efficient housing, power generation, industry, and better municipal waste management can effectively reduce key sources of ambient air pollution.
WHO response
WHO promotes interventions and initiatives for healthy sectoral policies (including energy, transport, housing, urban development and electrification of health-care facilities), addressing key risks to health from air pollution indoors and outdoors, and contributing to achieving health co-benefits from climate change mitigation policies.
WHO provides technical support to WHO’s Member States in the development of normative guidance, tools and provision of authoritative advice on health issues related to air pollution and its sources.
WHO monitors and reports on global trends and changes in health outcomes associated with actions taken to address air pollution at the national, regional and global levels.
WHO has also developed and implemented a strategy for raising awareness on the risk of air pollution, as well as available solutions that can be implemented to mitigate the risks of exposure to air pollution. Through digital outreach and partnerships, WHO has helped enrich the value proposition of addressing air pollution for health and environment ministries, city governments and other stakeholders from sectors with significant emissions.
Fact sheets
Household air pollution
Ambient (outdoor) air pollution
Electricity in health-care facilities
Sand and dust storms
Questions and answers
Air pollution: Reducing short-lived climate pollutants
Air pollution: Personal interventions and risk communication
Health-impact-assessment (HIA) and its role in decision making
WHO's fifth WHO air quality database of over 6000 cities
Databases and tools
Ambient air quality database
Air pollution and health training toolkit for health workers
Air quality standards
Benefits of action to reduce household air pollution tool (BAR-HAP tool)
Clean household energy solutions toolkit (CHEST)
Database on electrification of health-care facilities
Global health observatory: public health and environment
Global health observatory: air pollution data portal
Health impact assessment (HIA tools)
Household energy assessment rapid tool (HEART) templates
Household multiple emission sources (HOMES) model
Integrating health in urban and territorial planning: the directory
Maps and data
National air quality standards
Occupational Burden of Disease Application tool
Initiatives and groups
Initiative against extreme heat and health risks in workplaces and major events
Global air pollution and health - technical advisory group
Scientific advisory group on air pollution and health
SDG 11.6.2 working group
Resolutions and decisions
Health and the environment: addressing the health impact of air pollution (WHA68.8)
Health and the environment: draft road map for an enhanced global response to the adverse health effects of air pollution: report by the Secretariat (A69/18)
Health, environment and climate change: report by the Director-General (A71/10)
Health, environment and climate change: road map for an enhanced global response to the adverse health effects of air pollution: report by the Director-General (A71/10 Add.1)
Technical work
Environment, climate change and health
Air quality, energy and health
News
All →
24 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO unveils health and environment scorecards for 194 countries
25 June 2025
Joint News Release
Energy access has improved, yet international financial support still needed to boost progress and address disparities
12 June 2025
Departmental update
WHO’s “Beat the Heat” initiative making strides to protect workers and event participants from extreme heat and related environmental hazards
28 March 2025
Departmental update
Second WHO Global Conference on Air Pollution and Health concludes with powerful commitments to protect public health
Latest publications
All →
17 October 2025
WHO strategic approach on air quality, energy access and health
WHO, as the coordinating authority on international health, supports countries in protecting public health through evidence-based policies and actions....
Download
Read More
2 October 2025
Land use planning: sectoral solutions for air pollution and health
Exposure to air pollution and its associated health impacts are affected by land use practices including their regulation and enforcement. Understanding...
Download
Read More
4 September 2025
Green spaces: sectoral solutions for air pollution and health
Exposure to green spaces is widely associated with health benefits, including mental (e.g. reduced risk of depression and anxiety), physical (e.g. improved...
Download
Read More
4 September 2025
Understanding the health impacts of sand and dust storms
Sand and dust storms (SDS) result from turbulent winds that raise large quantities of particles from the ground into the air in emission areas. Emission...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
25 June 2025
2025 Tracking SDG7 Report
Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report 2025 finds that almost 92% of the world’s population now has basic access to electricity. Although this...
Download
Read More
25 June 2025
2025 Tracking SDG7 Report: Executive Summary
The Energy Progress Report 2025 finds that almost 92% of the world’s population now has basic access to electricity Although this is an...
Download
Read More
14 May 2025
Integrating health in urban and territorial planning: the directory
The directory is an online repository with more than 200 open access resources and tools updated on a regular basis that provide information on the importance...
Download
Read More
28 March 2025
Health science and policy summaries- advanced draft
The WHO Air Quality, Energy and Health Science and Policy Summaries (SPS) provide concise overviews of current knowledge and evidence on topics related...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Accelerating access to electricity in health-care facilities
Estimating the morbidity from air pollution and its economic costs
Identifying solutions for countries
Synthesizing evidence and knowledge on air pollution
Feature stories
All →
12 July 2023
Air pollution: The invisible health threat
6 October 2021
Launch of WHO's Household Energy Policy Repository
22 September 2021
What are the WHO Air quality guidelines?
6 September 2021
Transitioning to cleaner cooking
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Air pollution: susceptible and vulnerable groups
Infographic
Green and blue spaces for healthier cities and cleaner air
Infographic
WHO's work on air quality, energy and health
Infographic
Improving urban health through clean air in urban settings
Videos
All →
17 March 2025
WHO press conference on global health issues – 17 March 2025
29 January 2025
Doctors for Clean Air and Climate Action: Who We Are and What We Do
26 November 2024
Why we need cleaner air: Maria Neira at TEDx Athens
6 September 2023
Clean air & energy for health webinar #1 - New opportunities for air pollution and health education
Podcasts
Episode #141 – Air pollution damages young brains
Did you know that the air you breathe can harm your brain, and increase your risk for dementia, anxiety and depression ? Nine out of 10 people around the world breathe air that does not meet WHO’s recommended air quality standards. Air pollution kills 7 million people every year. What are  cities like London, Bogotá and Beijing doing to clean their air?  Dr Maria Neira explains in Science in 5.
Episode #66 - Air pollution, a public health emergency
Why does WHO consider air pollution a public health emergency? If you live in highly polluted areas does COVID-19 affect you differently? WHO’s Dr Maria Neira explains in Science in 5.
Episode #56 - Air pollution & COVID-19
What have we learned about air pollution and COVID-19? Learn about six air pollutants that are harming your health. Dr Maria Neira explains findings from WHO’s new air quality guidelines in Science in 5.
Episode #9 - Air pollution & COVID-19
How does air pollution affect our body during the pandemic ? Learn about air pollution and COVID-19 from Dr Maria Neira in Science in 5.
Events
All →
Webinar: Evidence on air pollution, energy access, climate change and health: Launch of Phase 2 of WHO’s Science and Policy Summaries (SPS)
4 September 2025 14:00 – 15:15 CET
A spotlight on Paris - a dialogue with Mayor Anne Hidalgo on promoting health, clean air, and climate resilience
25 July 2025 16:30 – 17:30 CET
Webinar: Launch of WHO’s Science and Policy Summaries (SPS) on Air Quality, Energy and Health
17 July 2025 14:00 – 15:15 CET
Spotlight
Air pollution and health video series
Related health topics
Disasters
Climate change
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases