Sepsis
Skip to main content
Overview
Sepsis is a life-threatening condition that arises when the body’s response to infection causes injury to its own tissues and organs. It is frequently a final common pathway to death for many infectious diseases worldwide. It involves organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection and if not recognized early and managed promptly, it can lead to septic shock, multiple organ failure and death. Although a precise estimate of the global epidemiological burden of sepsis is difficult to ascertain, a recent scientific publication reported that sepsis affects an estimated 49 million people and causes 11 million deaths globally every year.
In the community setting, sepsis often presents as the clinical deterioration of common and preventable infections. Sepsis also frequently results from
infections acquired in health care settings, which are one of the most frequent adverse events during care delivery and affect hundreds of millions of patients worldwide every year.
If sepsis develops during pregnancy, while or after giving birth, or after an abortion, it is called maternal sepsis. Sepsis in newborn babies is called neonatal sepsis. Despite being highly preventable, maternal and neonatal sepsis continues to be a major cause of death for pregnant women and newborn babies.
Symptoms
Sepsis is a medical emergency and requires immediate attention to prevent further complications or death. It may present different warning signs and symptoms at times, some of which may cause misidentification with other conditions. A septic infection may cause a fever, but may also cause low body temperature, cold extremities and shivering. There may be difficulty breathing or rapid breathing, as well as an increased heart rate, or conversely a weak pulse and low blood pressure. It may cause low urine output, as well as blue-tinted, mottled or abnormally pale skin, and an altered mental state. Finally, it may cause extreme body pain or discomfort, which makes it easy to confuse for influenza or food poisoning.
In children, sepsis may present through very fast breathing, convulsions, pale skin, lethargy or difficulty waking up or feeling abnormally cold to the touch. For children under 5 years, it may cause difficulty feeding, repeated vomiting or a lack of urination.
Suspecting sepsis and acting quickly is crucial for early recognition and diagnosis.
Treatment
Early identification of symptoms and timely establishment of appropriate clinical management are critical elements to reducing the risk and impact of sepsis. The detection of some biomarkers, such as C reactive protein and procalcitonin, can be effective in diagnosing the condition.
After early recognition, diagnostics to help identify a causal pathogen of infection leading to sepsis are important to guide targeted antimicrobial treatment. The appropriate antimicrobial therapy (for example, antibiotics and antifungals) should be given within one hour of sepsis identification.
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) can jeopardize clinical management of sepsis because empirical antibiotic treatment is often required. Early fluid resuscitation is important in the initial phase and vasopressors may be required to improve and maintain tissue perfusion.
There are two main steps to preventing sepsis:
Prevention of microbial transmission and infection
Prevention of an infection evolving into sepsis
Within the community, sepsis prevention is assisted through the use of effective hygiene practices, improving sanitation and water quality and availability, providing access to vaccines, particularly for those at high risk, as well as appropriate nutrition, including breastfeeding for newborns.
Prevention in health care facilities relies on infection prevention and control (IPC) programmes, effective hygiene practices, and clean, well-functioning equipment.
Fact sheets
Sepsis
Disease outbreak news
COVID-19
Ebola virus disease
Resolutions and decisions
Resolution WHA70.7 on Improving the prevention, diagnosis and clinical management of sepsis
Resolution WHA76.2 on Integrated emergency, critical and operative care for universal health coverage and protection from health emergencies
Technical work
Antimicrobial resistance
Clinical care for sepsis
Immunization, vaccines and biologicals
Infection prevention and control
Maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health
Sexual and reproductive health
News
All →
20 November 2025
Departmental update
Stronger infection prevention and management, better maternal outcomes
6 August 2025
Departmental update
WHO releases new target product profile for diagnostic tests to detect serious bacterial infections in young infants﻿
9 April 2025
Departmental update
Global Sepsis Alliance hosts annual World Sepsis Congress
30 January 2024
Departmental update
Guidelines on the Clinical Management of Sepsis
Latest publications
All →
24 September 2025
WHO recommendation on antibiotic prophylaxis during labour for vaginal birth
The primary audience for this guideline is health professionals who are responsible for developing national and local health protocols and policies, as...
Download
Read More
25 July 2025
In vitro diagnostic tests for serious bacterial infection, including neonatal sepsis, among infants aged...
An estimated 2.3 million newborns die each year. Low- and middle-income countries bear the greatest mortality burden, with sepsis contributing 15%. It...
Download
Read More
8 December 2024
WHO recommendations for management of serious bacterial infections in infants aged 0–59 days
The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed guidelines for the management of infants aged 0-59 days with serious bacterial infections (sepsis, meningitis,...
Download
Read More
18 June 2021
WHO recommendations on choice of antiseptic agent and method of application for preoperative skin preparation...
The recommendations in this document thus supersede the previous
WHO recommendations for choice of antiseptic agent and method of application for
preoperative...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Maternal infection is a cause of many maternal deaths
Infographic
Maternal infection is more common than you think
Infographic
How to prevent sepsis
Infographic
How to Handrub?
Infographics
All →
21 September 2023
Maternal Sepsis: Working towards an end in Malawi
3 May 2018
How to prevent sepsis - the role you can play in health care and communities
14 November 2016
What is antimicrobial resistance (AMR)?
20 October 2015
How to handwash? With soap and water
Events
All →
Preventing and managing maternal sepsis
24 November 2025 12:00 – 13:00 CET
World Sepsis Congress: Sepsis Research and Innovation
8 – 9 April 2025
Related health topics
Physical environment
Antimicrobial resistance
Diseases and conditions
Diarrhoea
Diseases and conditions
Pneumonia
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization