Intellectual property and trade - Global
Skip to main content
Overview
Intellectual property refers to intellectual activity in the industrial, scientific, literary and artistic fields. In the context of health care, the concept relates to topics such as the use of generic medicines, specifically how companies can market and sell these products within specific geographic regions. Intellectual property rights and the laws that govern them are important both to the control of standards and access to medicines, but also as an incentive for the development of new pharmaceuticals and health care products.
There has been great debate in recent years about the issue of intellectual property protection relating to access to generic medicines. This is particularly the case in areas where drug development is needed to treat a disease endemic to the region, but where the market is not large enough to support the costs of research. The balance needed between access and profit are at the heart of these debates and continue through discussions of free trade and regulation.
WHO response
Much of WHO’s work with intellectual property and trade relates to the World Trade Organization framework from 2001, known as the
Doha Declaration
and the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
. In 2006, the WHO Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, Innovation and Public Health (CIPIH) submitted its report containing 60 recommendations
aimed at fostering innovation and improving access to medicines.
Since the entry into force of the TRIPS Agreement, many resolutions of the World Health Assemblies have requested WHO to address the impact of trade agreements and intellectual property
protection on public health and access to medicines. WHO closely collaborates with other relevant international and regional organizations, such as the World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property Organization, to support Member States
on matters of intellectual property and trade policies, conduct training on the health impact of trade agreements, research innovation and intellectual property, and facilitate access to patent information.
Impact
Intellectual property rights to medicines and other medical products can be an incentive for the private sector to pursue innovation. However, this system is made more complicated for products intended for populations where the potential paying market is small or uncertain. Low- and middle-income countries, which account for more than 80% of the world’s population, are responsible for just 10% of global sales of many drugs due to the difficulty in affording or accessing necessary products. Poverty affects purchasing power, and the inability of poor people to pay reduces effective demand, which in turn affects the degree of interest of for-profit companies.
Member States, the pharmaceutical industry, charitable foundations and nongovernmental organizations have taken initiatives in recent years to develop new products against diseases affecting poor and middle-income countries and to increase access to existing health products and medical devices. International intellectual property agreements also contain flexibilities that could facilitate increased access to necessary pharmaceutical products. However, these initiatives are not sufficient to surmount the challenges of ensuring access and innovation for needed health products and medical devices. Much work is required to reverse the skewing of world drug markets towards the wealthiest nations.
Fact sheets
Commercial determinants of health
Q&A
Ethics in public health surveillance
Guidelines
WIPO intellectual property handbook
Guidelines on patentability and access to medicines
Guide for the application and granting of compulsory licences and authorization of government use of pharmaceutical patents
Databases
Patentscope
WHO resolutions
WHA73.11: Global strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and intellectual property
WHA73.1: COVID-19 response
WHA72.8: Improving the transparency of markets for medicines, vaccines, and other health products
WHA71.9: Global strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and       intellectual property: overall programme review
WHA68.18: Global strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and intellectual property
WHA62.16: Global strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and intellectual property
WHA61.21 Global strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and intellectual property
WHA60.30 Public health, innovation and intellectual property
WHA59.24: Public health, innovation, essential health research and intellectual property rights: towards a global strategy and plan of action
WHO Teams
Health product and policy standards
Our work
Strengthening access to essential medicines
Facilitating access to patent information
Ensuring fair prices for medicines
COVID-19 Technology Access Pool (C-TAP)
In May 2020, WHO and partners launched the COVID-19 Technology Access Pool (C-TAP) to facilitate timely, equitable and affordable access of COVID-19 health products by boosting their supply.
Overall programme review of GSPA
News
All →
11 July 2025
Departmental update
Public procurement as a key tool to tackle health issues discussed at WHO-WIPO-WTO webinar
28 February 2025
Departmental update
WHO, WIPO, and WTO hold first joint briefing for Geneva-based officials
Related content
Trilateral cooperation on intellectual property and public health
Statement
20 April 2020
Statement
Joint statement by WTO Director-General Roberto Azevêdo and WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus
Publications
All →
7 November 2025
Regional workshop Capacity Building in Technology Transfer on Public-Health Oriented Intellectual Property...
The objectives of 19-21 November 2024 Regional workshop in Kerala, was to encourage South–South technological collaboration that has significant...
Download
Read More
23 July 2025
Quality Local Production Training Workshop
During the Director General (DG) WHO’s and Regional Director (RD) SEARO’s visit to Kathmandu, Nepal, there was a request from the Ministry...
Download
Read More
30 June 2025
Access to safe, effective and quality-assured health products and technologies
The roadmap for WHO action 2025–2030 outlines to Member States, and other stakeholders WHO’s unique role and approach for increasing access...
Download
Read More
31 December 2024
Briefing note on access-oriented technology licensing
As outlined in WHO’s Global Strategy and Plan of
Action on Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual
Property, and in UNDP’s HIV and Health...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
29 July 2020
Promoting Access and Medical Innovation
26 June 2017
Q&A - The ethics of public health surveillance
Commentaries
10 January 2018
Facilitating access to patent information
Related health topics
Health systems
Health Laws
Health interventions
Medical devices
Health interventions
Medicines
Health systems
Health systems governance
Health systems
Substandard and falsified medical products
Other
Universal health coverage
Partners
WIPO Global challenges and intellectual property
WTO – TRIPS and public health
Contact
gspoa@who.int