Health security
Skip to main content
Overview
Global public health security is defined as the activities required, both proactive and reactive, to minimize the danger and impact of acute public health events that endanger people’s health across geographical regions and international boundaries.
Population growth, rapid urbanization, environmental degradation, and the misuse of antimicrobials are disrupting the equilibrium of the microbial world. New diseases, like COVID-19, are emerging at unprecedented rates disrupting people’s health
and causing social and economic impacts. Billions of passengers travel on airplanes each year, increasing the opportunities for the rapid international spread of infectious agents and their vectors.
Dependence on chemicals has increased, as has awareness of the potential hazards for health and the environment, like climate change and air pollution. As the globalization of food production increases, so does the risk of tainted ingredients and
risk of foodborne diseases. As the world’s population becomes more mobile and increases its economic interdependence, these global health threat increase and traditional defences at national borders cannot protect against the invasion of
a disease or vector.
Pandemics, health emergencies and weak health systems not only cost lives but pose some of the greatest risks to the global economy and security faced today.
WHO response
WHO’s mission is to help all countries fulfil their duty of safety and care to their citizens, especially to the poorest and most vulnerable. This is the goal of global public health security: to demonstrate how collective international public health
action can build a safer future for humanity.
WHO Member States face increasing numbers of emergencies with health consequences from all hazards, including infectious disease outbreaks, conflicts, natural disasters, chemical or radio-nuclear spills and food contamination. Many emergencies can be
complex, with more than one cause, and can have significant public health, social, economic and political impacts. WHO has specific responsibilities and accountabilities for emergency operations under the International Health Regulations (IHR) (2005)
and within the global humanitarian system as the Interagency Standing Committee (IASC) Global Health Cluster Lead Agency.
WHO's health security interface works with involving international organizations, civil defense, military doctors, law enforcement and armed forces. The Secretariat advocates for the role of public health in the security sector, increase WHO preparedness
and response to deliberate events and provides awareness about health security internationally.
Disease outbreak news
Latest WHO Disease Outbreak News (DONs)
Resolutions and decisions
WHA69.4 The role of the health sector in the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management towards the 2020 goal and beyond
WHA 64.10 Strengthening national health emergency and disaster management capacities and resilience of health systems
WHA 55.16 Global public health response to natural occurrence, accidental release or deliberate use of biological and chemical agents or radio-nuclear material that affect health
WHA56.28 (‎2003)‎. Revision of the International Health Regulations
WHA58.3 Revision of the International Health Regulations
WHA72.8, Public health emergencies: preparedness and response International Health Regulations (‎‎2005)‎‎: annual report on the implementation of the International Health Regulations (‎‎2005)‎‎: report by the Director-General
News
All →
13 October 2024
Departmental update
WHO launches new Horizon X Programme for One Health emergency preparedness
31 October 2023
Departmental update
FAO, WHO, and WOAH launch new online course on joint response to zoonotic disease outbreaks
30 November 2022
Departmental update
Center for International Peace Operations (ZIF) supports first all-women Health Cluster leadership training
4 October 2022
Departmental update
WHO launches the Emergency Medical Teams 2030 Strategy at Global Meeting to strengthen rapid response amid emergencies worldwide
Publications
All →
18 November 2025
Joint external evaluation of the International Health Regulations (2005) core capacities of the Lao People’s...
The Joint External Evaluation (JEE) team would like to express its appreciation to Lao People’s
Democratic Republic for volunteering to undertake...
Download
Read More
6 November 2025
Joint external evaluation of the International Health Regulations (2005) core capacities of Qatar: mission...
The Joint External Evaluation (JEE) team expresses its appreciation to Qatar for volunteering for the JEE
and for its commitment to global health security....
Download
Read More
15 October 2025
Joint external evaluation of the International Health Regulations (2005) core capacities of Malawi: mission...
The Government of Malawi conducted the second multisectoral Joint External Evaluation (JEE) from 2–6
December 2024. The major purpose of this exercise...
Download
Read More
13 October 2025
Joint external evaluation of the International Health Regulations (2005) core capacities of Eswatini...
The International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) are legally binding regulations developed by the World
Health Organization. They are aimed at helping...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Strengthening community protection and resilience for health emergencies
Strengthening readiness to respond to emergencies
Translating science for better health emergency preparedness
Strengthening the global health-security interface
Feature stories
All →
4 September 2025
Strengthening Vanuatu's health resilience with better data collection
2 September 2025
Donors’ support for WHO work in Syria makes a difference in protecting and improving health in the country
28 August 2025
Donors making a difference with worldwide support for WHO’s work on health emergencies
13 August 2025
GOARN impact in the field: Brazil implements Go.Data for enhanced contact tracing
Photo story
13 January 2020
Urgent health challenges for the next decade
Events
All →
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: building the future of public health intelligence: launch of the PHI Competency Framework and Curriculum
3 December 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: defining cases of meningococcal disease: a public health tool for outbreak prevention and control
26 November 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: attributes of pathogen genomic data platforms supporting timely and equitable sharing
24 November 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: introduction to the WHO outbreak toolkit and applications
19 November 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
Speech
8 July 2017
Health emergencies represent some of the greatest risks to the global economy and security
Commentary
16 August 2018
Invest today for a healthy and prosperous future
Related health topics
Health systems
Health systems governance
Socio-political determinants
International Health Regulations
Other
Universal health coverage