Rehabilitation
Skip to main content
Overview
Rehabilitation addresses the impact of a health condition
on a person’s everyday life by optimizing their functioning and reducing their
experience of disability. Rehabilitation expands the focus of health beyond
preventative and curative care to ensure people with a health condition can
remain as independent as possible and participate in education, work and
meaningful life roles. Anyone may need rehabilitation at some point in their
lives, whether they have experienced an injury, disease, illness, or because
their functioning has declined with age.
Globally, 1 in 3 people today are estimated to be living
with a health condition that would benefit from rehabilitation. This need is
predicted to increase in the coming years due to changes in the health and characteristics
of the population. For example, people are living longer but with more chronic
disease and disability. Emergencies, including conflicts, disasters and
outbreaks can all create surges in rehabilitation needs. Globally, many people
are living with mid- and long-term consequences of COVID-19 and may be in need
of rehabilitation to support their recovery from the disease.
Impact
Although the need for rehabilitation is increasing
globally, many countries are unequipped to respond to existing needs. In some
low- and middle-income countries, more than 50% of people do not receive the
rehabilitation services they require. Rehabilitation services are often under
funded and under valued, particularly in countries without strong health
systems.
Rehabilitation helps to reduce the impacts of disease and
injury on individuals, while also complimenting other health interventions. This
means it can be seen as an investment in health care costs because it can lower
long term reliance on health systems through reducing hospitalization, shortening
hospital stays and preventing readmissions. The investment pays off further by enabling
people to return to work, education and other pursuits more quickly following the
health issue.
Rehabilitation is a neglected but essential part of emergency
response and long-term recovery. Emergencies disproportionately effect weaker
health systems and the most vulnerable, but early and ongoing access to
rehabilitation reduces complications, optimizes functioning and reduces
disability in those affected, supporting individuals, families and communities
in their recovery.
WHO response
WHO views rehabilitation as an essential part of achieving both
universal health coverage and goal 3 of the
Sustainable Development Goals
. To
this end, WHO works to make rehabilitation part of health care at all levels
through efforts to strengthen health systems as a whole.
In 2017 WHO launched the
Rehabilitation 2030
initiative
, which emphasizes the need for concerted and coordinated action
by all stakeholders to strengthen the health system to provide quality and
timely rehabilitation. This occurs through actions such as improving leadership
and governance; developing a strong multidisciplinary rehabilitation workforce;
expanding financing for rehabilitation; and improving data collection and
research on rehabilitation. In emergencies, we are developing tools to help
strengthen rehabilitation preparedness, while also working to better integrate
rehabilitation into responses.
WHO continues to support countries to implement these
actions through providing technical support, developing guidance and practical
tools, and increasing the development of robust evidence for rehabilitation. These
efforts focus both on local and national health systems, as well as responses
to emergencies to ensure rehabilitation services are available to anyone who
needs them.
Fact sheets
Rehabilitation
Questions and answers
Rehabilitation
WHO Rehabilitation Programme FAQs
Initiatives and groups
Rehabilitation 2030
World Rehabilitation Alliance
Training
Wheelchair service training package - Basic level
Wheelchair service training package - Intermediate level
Wheelchair service training package for managers
Rehabilitation for COVID-19 training
Resolutions and decisions
WHA76.6 Strengthening rehabilitation in health systems
Technical work
Noncommunicable diseases, rehabilitation and disability
Sensory Functions, Disability and Rehabilitation
News
All →
23 June 2025
Departmental update
Global leaders call for the integration of assistive technology and rehabilitation in health emergency response
19 February 2025
Departmental update
Leaders make new road safety commitments, endorse new declaration to reduce road deaths
19 January 2025
News release
The ceasefire in Gaza brings hope, but immense challenges lie ahead to restore the health system
20 December 2024
News release
Lebanon: soaring needs for trauma treatment and rehabilitation
12 September 2024
News release
WHO analysis highlights vast unmet rehabilitation needs in Gaza
26 May 2024
News release
WHO announces winners of the 5th Health for All Film Festival
6 June 2023
News release
WHO announces winners of the
4th Health for All Film Festival
27 May 2023
Departmental update
Landmark resolution on strengthening rehabilitation in health systems
21 September 2022
Departmental update
WHO’s Director-General and Minister-President of Wallonia, Belgium, sign framework agreement on the sides of the UNGA
17 May 2022
Departmental update
WHO announces winners of the 3rd Health for All Film Festival
16 March 2022
News release
WHO announces Film Festival 3rd edition shortlist and jury, including Sharon Stone, Emilia Clarke, Mia Maestro, Anita Abada, Eddie Ndopu and Dr. Eckart von Hirschhausen
3 December 2021
Departmental update
Call for Papers: Health Policy and Systems Research for Rehabilitation
28 October 2021
News release
WHO launches the third edition Health for All Film Festival call for short films
7 May 2021
Departmental update
First deployment of WHO emergency rehabilitation support
5 February 2021
Departmental update
WHO launches free OpenWHO.org training on rehabilitation for COVID-19
14 February 2018
Departmental update
International focus on snakebite envenoming grows
2 May 2015
News release
WHO mobilizes funds for long-term spinal cord treatment after Nepal earthquake
17 November 2014
Departmental update
WHO welcomes discoveries in vertebrology for the treatment of low back pain
2 December 2013
News release
Spinal cord injury: as many as 500 000 people suffer each year
20 September 2013
Note for Media
Governments to agree increased focus on people with disabilities in  development strategies
Our work
Strengthening rehabilitation in emergencies
Integrating rehabilitation into health systems
Strengthening rehabilitation research and evidence
Advocating for rehabilitation
The World Rehabilitation Alliance (WRA) is a WHO-hosted global network of stakeholders whose mission is to support the implementation of the Rehabilitation 2030 Initiative through advocacy activities.
Events
All →
Cycling for a cause: Ankylosing spondylitis awareness
5 July 2024 09:30 – 10:30 CET
Addressing musculoskeletal conditions: an opportunity for health systems globally
31 January – 20 November 2024
Latest publications
All 	→
14 October 2025
Framework on provision of rehabilitation services in the WHO South-East Asia Region
Rehabilitation is an essential health strategy for optimizing functioning and reducing disability, critical to achieving universal health coverage (UHC)...
Download
Read More
18 February 2025
Minimum technical standards and recommendations for spinal cord injury management in emergencies
Health emergencies that cause large numbers of traumatic injuries can result in surges of spinal cord injuries (SCI) in a short period of time, that can...
Download
Read More
24 January 2025
Using the package of interventions for rehabilitation in Georgia
The Package of interventions for rehabilitation (PIR) outlines the most essential interventions for rehabilitation for 20 health conditions, together with...
Download
Read More
29 December 2024
Integrated care for older people (‎ICOPE)‎: guidance for person-centred assessment and pathways in primary...
The ICOPE handbook supports health and care workers to put evidence- based recommendations into practice in primary care including community. The handbook...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
12 September 2024
Estimating Trauma Rehabilitation Needs in Gaza using Injury Data from Emergency Medical Teams
This technical note provides evidence-based insights on the number and distribution of conflict-related injuries by type in Gaza since October 2023. This...
Download
Read More
22 August 2024
Basic package of interventions for rehabilitation: A toolkit for primary care professionals – information...
Global and demographic trends indicate an increasing need for rehabilitation as a result of population ageing, increasing prevalence in noncommunicable...
Download
Read More
20 June 2023
Guide for rehabilitation workforce evaluation – information sheet
The Guide for Rehabilitation Workforce Evaluation (GROWE) comprises a suite of resources that can be applied in countries to provide information to...
Download
Read More
1 March 2023
2nd Joint Advocacy Statement by the World Rehabilitation Alliance regarding the Turkey and Syria Earthquakes
Joint Advocacy Statement by the World Rehabilitation Alliance regarding the Turkey and Syria Earthquakes.
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
Rehab in action
Photo stories
17 February 2025
Expanding rehabilitation access in Tajikistan
Videos
All →
20 December 2026
Rehabilitation: addressing musculoskeletal conditions, an opportunity for health systems – webinar 4
29 October 2024
Rehabilitation: addressing musculoskeletal conditions, an opportunity for health systems – webinar 3
27 May 2024
Journey Beyond the Rubble #Film4Health
Health for All Film Festival (HAFF)
The 3rd edition of the HAFF will have a Special Prize on Rehabilitation for films telling stories about the life-changing impact that rehabilitation has on people’s lives.
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Rehabilitation 2030 resources
Infographic
Improving access to rehabilitation for people living with noncommunicable diseases (PLWNCDs)
Infographic
Rehabilitation Competency Framework
Infographic
Rehabilitation in emergencies
Related health topics
Rehabilitation and COVID-19
Populations and demographics
Disability
Health interventions
Assistive technology
Conditions
Deafness and hearing loss
Diseases and conditions
Eye care, vision impairment and blindness