Health impact assessment
Skip to main content
Overview
Health impact assessment (HIA) is a practical approach used to systematically judge the potential health effects of a policy, strategy, plan, programme or project on a population, particularly on vulnerable or disadvantaged groups.
HIA can help to identify the distribution of those effects within the population, generate evidence for proper action to avoid and mitigate sometimes unintended health risks, and promote health opportunities. Recommendations are produced for decision-makers and stakeholders, and a framework for monitoring and evaluating changes in health is offered as part of performance management and sustainable development.
The approach can be applied in diverse economic sectors and uses quantitative, qualitative and participatory techniques. Examples of how HIA has been used include clean energy options, master plans, planning for green spaces, transportation and urban growth projects, zoning for walkability, air pollution and noise reduction interventions, climate change mitigation and adaptation policies. HIA provides a way to engage with members of the public affected by a particular proposal. It also helps decision-makers and Member States make choices about alternatives and improvements to prevent disease or injury and to actively promote health. It is based on the four interlinked values of democracy (promoting stakeholder participation), equity (considering the impact on the whole population), sustainable development and the ethical use of evidence.
Impact
HIA is a consolidated approach to estimate and anticipate the consequences
of policies, plans, programmes and projects. It is a key resource for achieving
foresight in societal decision-making, systematically deployed worldwide. Economic
sectors such as transport, agriculture, energy, waste and housing have profound
impacts on health. For instance, transport is a major factor in traffic
injuries, air pollution and noise, and healthy transport policies can help
reduce these risks, as well as promoting walking and cycling. In agriculture,
fertilizers and pesticides may boost crop yields, but wise use is important to
protect farm workers and consumers from excessive chemical exposure. Health
impact assessment can be a valuable tool for helping to develop policy and
assisting decision-makers in these and other areas.
Resources
WHO is responding by building the capacity, providing tools and initiatives in health impact assessment to dynamically improve health and well-being across sectors.
WHO supports the health sector to effectively engage in urban health, working across sectors to help cities to produce contextual, meaningful and actionable information on the health, economic and climate impacts of urban environments. WHO supports decision-makers to equip themselves to accept, reject or amend policy alternatives, in the knowledge that they have the best available health evidence before them.
Health risk assessment techniques have been applied in the air pollution field for many years. Tools for HIA include
AirQ+,
with the goal to quantify the health burden and impact of air pollution;
CLIMAQ-H
, a software assessing the outcomes of climate-driven policies and support decision-making; and
HEAT for walking and cycling
,
a web-based tool used to estimate the health and economic impacts of increased walking and cycling. All tools are downloadable for free.
Other relevant information is available from
WHO-EURO
.
Questions and answers
Health-impact-assessment (HIA) and its role in decision making
Databases and tools
Health impact assessment (HIA) tools and methods
HEAT for walking and cycling
Technical work
Environment, Climate Change and Health
Air Quality, Energy and Health
Health Impact Assessment (WHO-EURO)
News
All →
29 July 2024
Departmental update
WHO announces the 2024 updated Compendium of interventions on environmental health
Our work
All →
Estimating environmental health impacts
Supporting policymaking and evidence-gathering for health impact assessment
Latest publications
All →
8 October 2024
Monitoring progress on universal health coverage and the health-related Sustainable Development Goals...
The ninth annual report on Monitoring progress on universal health coverage and the health-related Sustainable Development Goals in the South-East Asia...
Download
Read More
3 July 2024
Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance in health and environment, 2024 update
This is the 2024 update of the Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment.
The Compendium is a comprehensive collection of available...
Download
Read More
23 January 2024
Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment: version with International Classification...
In this version of the compendium, each guidance is coded using the International Classification of Health Interventions (ICHI).The compendium provides...
Download
Read More
7 September 2022
Regulations and Laws promoting health and well-being goals (SDG3) in WHO South-East Asian countries
All countries of the WHO SE Asia Region are making every effort to accelerate progress towards achieving Sustainable Development Goal 3 by 2030 for the...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
500 actions to take, including 190 measures to create healthier environments in health care, contributing to universal health coverage
Infographic
Do you want to create healthier environments and protect health of the populations? Choose from 500 actions in this Compendium
Infographic
500 actions to take, including 20 practical steps to improve schools and child-care settings that ensure children's well-being
Infographic
500 actions to take, including 22 ways to promote food safety and healthier, more sustainable diets
Videos
All →
15 September 2019
How do you calculate the economic loss or benefits based on your studies of air pollution reduction efforts?
15 September 2019
Can you explain the two different ways that Years of Life Lost (YLLs) are calculated?
15 September 2019
Can you describe the disability adjusted life year calculator and your recent work to update the Global Exposure Model?
15 September 2019
What is the path that air pollution particles take through our body?
Related health topics
Physical environment
Air pollution
Socio-political determinants
Sustainable development
Socio-political determinants
Urban health