Infertility
Skip to main content
Overview
Infertility is a global health issue affecting millions of people of reproductive age
worldwide. Available data suggests that globally one in six people experience infertility in their lifetime. Infertility is a disease of the male or female
reproductive system defined by the failure to achieve a pregnancy after 12 months or
more of regular unprotected sexual intercourse. Primary infertility is the inability to
have any pregnancy, while secondary infertility is the inability to have a pregnancy
after previously successful conception. WHO’s International Classification of Diseases
provides more information on the many primary and secondary causes of infertility in
both women and men.
Infertility may occur due to male factors, female factors, a combination of male and
female factors or may be unexplained. For both women and men, however,
lifestyle factors such as smoking, excessive alcohol intake and obesity
have been associated with higher chances of infertility.
Impact
Every human being has a right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. Individuals and couples have the right to decide the number, timing and spacing of their children. Addressing infertility is therefore an
important part of realizing the right of individuals and couples to found a family.
A wide variety of people globally may require infertility management and fertility care services. Disparities in access to fertility care services adversely affect the poor, unmarried, uneducated, unemployed
and other underserved and marginalised populations.
Infertility has significant negative impacts on the lives of infertile couples. Women in particular are at greater risk of violence, divorce, social stigma, emotional stress, depression, anxiety
and low self-esteem. In some settings, fear of infertility can deter women and men from using contraception if they feel socially pressured to prove their fertility at an early age because of a high social value of childbearing. Infertility can also
have negative economic impact when households incur catastrophic out-of-pocket expenditure to access treatment.
WHO response
Availability, access, and quality of interventions to address infertility remain a
challenge in most countries. Prevention, diagnosis and treatment of infertility are often not prioritized in national policies and are rarely covered through public health
financing. A lack of necessary equipment and trained personnel, together with the high
costs of treatment, are additional barriers preventing universal access to fertility care.
While assisted reproduction technology (ART) has been available for over three
decades, it is still largely unaffordable in many parts of the world.
The World Health Organization is committed to addressing infertility and is currently working on a programme on infertility research and fertility care. It is also developing guidelines on the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of male and female infertility, as part of global norms and standards.
WHO is engaging with countries to address infertility within an enabling legal and
policy environment and to support the generation of data on the burden of infertility.
WHO is working with relevant stakeholders including academic centres, ministries of
health, UN organizations, non-state actors and other partners to strengthen political
commitment, and health system capacity related to fertility care.
Fact sheets
Infertility
Databases and tools
Policy database
Technical work
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
News
All →
4 April 2023
News release
1 in 6 people globally affected by infertility: WHO
27 July 2021
Departmental update
WHO launches updated manual to ensure high quality testing of human semen in clinical and research settings
4 February 2020
Departmental update
Multiple definitions of infertility
8 March 2017
Departmental update
Integrating fertility care and HIV treatment and prevention: how couples affected by HIV can achieve pregnancy safely
Latest publications
All →
3 April 2023
Infertility Prevalence Estimates, 1990–2021
Infertility is a disease of the male or female reproductive system defined by the failure to achieve a pregnancy after 12 months or more of regular unprotected...
Download
Read More
27 July 2021
WHO laboratory manual for the examination and processing of human semen, 6th ed
The sixth edition of the WHO Manual for the Laboratory Examination and Processing of Human Semen is a reference document for procedures and methods for...
Download
Read More
1 January 2013
Preconception care to reduce maternal and childhood mortality and morbidity
OverviewReduction of maternal and childhood mortality and morbidity requires the provision of a continuum of care that spans pregnancy, childbirth, infancy,...
Download
Read More
4 October 2002
Current practices and controversies in assisted reproduction
This publication comprises 6 sections, consisting of the background papers and the recommendations agreed to by the meeting participants. The papers are...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Millions of people around the world lack access to fertility care
Infographic
Infertility is a disease of the male or female reproduction system
Infographic
Fertility care includes interventions that prevent, diagnose and treat infertility
Infographic
Approximately 1 out of every 6 people experiences infertility in their lifetime
Videos
All →
10 September 2023
Infertility Care: Opening remarks at the opening ceremony of the International Federation of Fertility Societies Word Congress
4 April 2023
Webinar/report launch: Global infertility prevalence estimates
20 July 2021
Webinar: WHO laboratory manual for the examination and processing of human semen
7 July 2020
Message of WHO Director-General Dr Tedros at the 2019 IFFS World Congress in Shanghai, China
Events
All →
Launch webinar: WHO guideline for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of infertility
28 November 2025 13:00 – 14:30 CET
Webinar: Launch of Infertility Prevalence Estimates, 1990-2021
4 April 2023 13:00 – 14:30 CET
Feature stories
All →
4 April 2023
Infertility: When having a child feels out of reach
Related health topic
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health
Diseases and conditions
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)