Diphtheria
Skip to main content
Overview
Diphtheria is a serious infection caused by strains of the bacteria called
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
which makes a toxin. The toxin attaches itself most commonly to tissues in the respiratory system and causes disease by killing healthy tissue.
Typical symptoms of the infection include a sore throat, fever, swollen neck glands and weakness. Within 2–3 days from infection, the dead tissue forms a thick, grey coating that can cover tissues in the nose, tonsils and throat, making it hard to breathe and swallow. More rarely, the toxin gets into the blood stream and causes damage to the heart, kidneys and nerves.
Diphtheria bacteria spread from person to person, usually through respiratory droplets, like from coughing or sneezing. People can also get sick from touching infected open sores or ulcers. Those at increased risk of getting sick include household contacts, those exposed to secretions from the patient and those with frequent and close contact with the infected person.
Prevention
Diphtheria is a vaccine-preventable disease and is included in all countries' essential immunization programme. Diphtheria vaccine is a bacterial toxoid, i.e. a toxin whose toxicity has been inactivated. Currently available diphtheria vaccines are very effective in preventing this disease.
WHO recommends a 3-dose primary vaccination series with diphtheria- containing vaccine, followed by 3 booster doses. The primary series should begin as early as 6 weeks of age with subsequent doses given with a minimum interval of 4 weeks between doses. The 3 booster doses should preferably be given during the second year of life (12–23 months), at 4–7 years and at 9–15 years of age. Ideally, there should be at least 4 years between booster doses to achieve long term protection.
The vaccine can be given in combination with other vaccines such as tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B,
Hemophilus influenzae
b and polio.
People who get a diphtheria vaccine may experience mild side effects. Serious side effects are rare.
Treatments
Treatment for diphtheria includes antibiotics to get rid of the bacteria. For serious illnesses, diphtheria antitoxin is used to stop the bacterial toxin from causing damage to the respiratory system and other parts of the body. Anyone who has had diphtheria should also receive the vaccine after the acute phase of the illness is over.
Close contacts of a person with diphtheria may also be treated with antibiotics.  This prevents further spread of the bacteria. The specific antibiotics used will depend on local known antibiotic resistance patterns.
The risk of complications or death decrease considerably if appropriate treatment is provided early in the course of illness. For this reason, if diphtheria is suspected, testing to confirm the disease should be done promptly, and treatment should be started as soon as possible.
Fact sheets
Diphtheria
Questions and answers
Diphtheria
Databases and tools
Diphtheria Outbreak Toolbox
WHO Immunization Data portal
Global Health Observatory: Diphtheria
Disease outbreak news
Diphtheria - Guinea
Diphtheria - Nigeria
Latest disease outbreak news and situation reports
Training
Immunization in Practice
Technical work
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
Emergencies
News
All →
15 July 2025
Joint News Release
Global childhood vaccination coverage holds steady, yet over 14 million infants remain unvaccinated – WHO, UNICEF
18 July 2023
Joint News Release
Childhood immunization begins recovery after COVID-19 backslide
24 April 2023
Joint News Release
Global partners announce a new effort – “The Big Catch-up” – to vaccinate millions of children and restore immunization progress lost during the pandemic
14 March 2023
Departmental update
Message by the Director of the Department of Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals at WHO - March 2023
Publications
All →
1 March 2024
Infection prevention and control measures when caring for patients with suspected or confirmed respiratory...
This operational guide addresses important infection prevention and control (IPC) measures that should be implemented during a diphtheria outbreak and...
Download
Read More
29 February 2024
Infection prevention and control and water, sanitation and hygiene measures for diphtheria in health-care...
This operational guide addresses important infection prevention and control (IPC) measures that should be implemented during a diphtheria outbreak and...
Download
Read More
2 February 2024
Clinical management of diphtheria: guideline, 2 February 2024 ﻿
The WHO Clinical management of diphtheria contains the most up-to-date recommendations for the clinical management of people with diphtheria....
Download
Read More
2 February 2024
Safety and monitoring in patients receiving diphtheria antitoxin, 2 February 2024
The WHO diphtheria antitoxin poster series contain the most up to date guidance and information for healthcare workers about diphtheria antitoxin, it’s...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
21 November 2025
WHO Rapid Risk Assessment - Diphtheria, African Region v.1
This Rapid Risk Assessment (RRA) aims to assess the risk of diphtheria at the regional level, considering the public health impact, the risk of geographical...
Download
Read More
21 October 2021
WHO/BS/2021.2407: WHO 2nd International Standard - Diphtheria Antitoxin Equine (DI)
This document has been prepared for the purpose of inviting comments and suggestions on the proposals
contained therein, which will then be considered...
Download
Read More
4 September 2018
Diphtheria: Vaccine Preventable Diseases Surveillance Standards
Diphtheria is caused by Corynebacterium species, mostly
by toxin-producing Corynebacterium diphtheriae and
rarely by toxin-producing strains of C....
Download
Read More
20 January 2006
Position paper -  Diphtheria
In accordance with its mandate to provide guidance to Member States on health policy matters, WHO is issuing a series of regularly updated...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
Building momentum against diphtheria outbreak in Nigeria
Donors making a difference in South-East Asia and the Western Pacific
Indonesia: WHO supports lifesaving diphtheria programmes during COVID-19 pandemic
Events
28 March 2024 12:00 – 13:00 CET
Managing diphtheria: the new WHO clinical management guidelines
SEARO - World Water Day 2024
1 January – 31 December 2024
50th anniversary of the Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI)
6 December 2023 11:00 – 12:30 CET
Diphtheria diagnostics and optimizations for outbreak settings
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Pertussis
Diseases and conditions
Tetanus
Related links
Summary information on internationally available vaccines against diphtheria
Diphtheria Vaccine Standardization