Primary health care
Skip to main content
Overview
All people, everywhere, have the right to achieve the highest attainable level of health. This is the fundamental premise of primary health care (PHC).
Primary health care is a whole-of-society approach to effectively organize and strengthen national health systems to bring services for health and wellbeing closer to communities. It has 3 components:
integrated health services to meet people’s health needs throughout their lives
addressing the broader determinants of health through multisectoral policy and action
empowering individuals, families and communities to take charge of their own health.
Primary health care enables health systems to support a person’s health needs – from health promotion to disease prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, palliative care and more. This strategy also ensures that health care is delivered in a way that is centred on people’s needs and respects their preferences.
Primary health care is widely regarded as the most inclusive, equitable and cost-effective way to achieve universal health coverage. It is also key to strengthening the resilience of health systems to prepare for, respond to and recover from shocks and crises.
Impact
Universal health coverage will only be possible when everyone, everywhere can access the health services they need. Communities should be empowered to identify their health priorities and contribute to finding responsive solutions. Heath care and other sectors need to work together to ensure all decisions affecting health are addressed in an integrated way. This includes promoting policies to protect and improve people’s health and well-being; providing information, services and infrastructure for improved water and sanitation and other environmental determinants of health; prevention of noncommunicable diseases; preparing for and responding to health emergencies; providing services for pregnant women, routine vaccination for children and sexual and reproductive health services; mental health support; platforms for community consultation and many others. Primary health care brings these factors together to ensure the highest possible level of health and well-being and their equitable distribution.
The impact is seen in health systems that focus on people’s needs and are as close as feasible to their everyday environment. Primary health care-oriented health systems consistently produce better outcomes, enhanced equity and improved efficiency. Scaling up primary health care interventions across low- and middle-income countries could save 60 million lives and increase average life expectancy by 3.7 years by 2030.
WHO response
WHO supports Member States in taking a primary health care approach to accelerate progress in achieving universal health coverage. Countries are demonstrating how this strategy has been effective in strengthening their health systems to address people’s needs, both in times of crisis as in normal times.
The principles of primary health care were first outlined in the
Declaration of Alma-Ata
in 1978, a seminal milestone in global health. Forty years later, global leaders ratified the
Declaration of Astana
at the
Global Conference on Primary Health Care
which took place in Astana, Kazakhstan in October 2018. The following year, at the
UN high-level meeting on universal health coverage
, countries declared their commitment to “expand the delivery of and prioritize primary health care as a cornerstone of a sustainable people-centred, community-based and integrated health system and the foundation for achieving universal health coverage.”
To support Member States in translating this commitment into practical actions that are aligned with national contexts and priorities, WHO established the
Special Programme on Primary Health Care
and, together with UNICEF, released the
Operational Framework for Primary Health Care
and the
Primary health care measurement framework and indicators.
Fact sheets
Primary health care
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Questions and answers
Primary health care
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 72.2 Primary health care
WHA62.12 Primary health care, including health system strengthening
EB146 (18) Primary health care
UNGA 74/2 Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, 2019
UNGA 78/4 Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, 2023
Technical work
Primary health care
News
All →
14 November 2025
Departmental update
Investing in primary health care in Ethiopia: a joint technical workshop
11 November 2025
Departmental update
World Pneumonia Day – 12 November 2025
5 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO at the 151st IPU Assembly: advancing health, rights and resilience through parliamentary action
23 September 2025
News release
Uncontrolled high blood pressure puts over a billion people at risk
Our work
Moving towards PHC
Monitoring and improving PHC
Health systems resilience
Essential public health functions
Evidence and innovation
Publications
All →
15 October 2025
Governance for public health across the health and allied sectors: a report to guide country-level institutional...
The diverse public health challenges require multisectoral, integrated action, supported by robust and well-coordinated governance that...
Download
Read More
9 September 2025
Strengthening primary health care-oriented health systems to address antimicrobial resistance
A primary health care (PHC)-oriented health system aims to maximize the level and distribution of health and well-being through three components: (i) primary...
Download
Read More
7 September 2025
WHO labour care guide: implementation resource package
The WHO Labour Care Guide advances evidence-based, respectful, and person-centered intrapartum care by strengthening health workers’ capacity for...
Download
Read More
20 August 2025
Landscape analysis of primary health care research in South, East Asia and the Pacific: policy brief
Strengthening PHC systems has been a priority for many countries in South, East Asia and the Pacific. Yet, research investments and evidence availability...
Download
Read More
Key documents
8 October 2019
Declaration of Alma-Ata
The Declaration of Alma-Ata was endorsed at the Alma-Ata conference, jointly convened by WHO and UNICEF, that focused world attention on primary health...
Download
Read More
26 October 2018
Declaration of Astana
The Global Conference on Primary Health Care in Astana, Kazakhstan in October 2018 endorsed a new declaration emphasizing the critical role of primary...
Download
Read More
15 April 2021
Review of 40 years of primary health care implementation at country level - Management Response - April 2021
Review of 40 years of primary health care implementation at country level - Management Response - April 2021
1 December 2019
Review of 40 years of primary health care implementation at country level - Report
Review of 40 years of primary health care implementation at country level - Report
30 November 2019
Review of 40 years of primary health care implementation at country level - Evaluation Brief - Dec 2019
Review of 40 years of primary health care implementation at country level - Evaluation Brief - Dec 2019
Events
All →
2024
Universal Health Coverage Day 2024
12 December 2024
Universal Health Coverage & Universal Social Protection: A joint agenda to improve health equity and well-being in the informal economy
12 December 2024
Fifth WHO Global School on Refugee and Migrant Health
2 – 6 December 2024
Highlights
Back to the future: harnessing the power of primary health care to transform our health systems
24 October 2023, Media release
Global Conference on Primary Health Care
25-26 October 2018 - Astana, Kazakhstan. On the 40th anniversary of the Alma-Ata Declaration, global health leaders and stakeholders returned to Kazakhstan to renew the promise of primary health care as the most effective and efficient means to achieve universal health coverage. Based on a bold vision, the Declaration of Astana sets out four commitments for countries to make primary health care a reality.
Feature stories
All →
18 July 2025
Expanding indigenous peoples’ access to quality primary health care in Paraguay
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
23 May 2025
Six public health champions celebrated at the Seventy-eighth World Health Assembly
4 April 2025
Fatima: crossing deserts to protect mothers and newborns in Pakistan
Multimedia
All →
9 December 2024
Primary Health Care: What is the political economy around PHC-oriented reforms?
6 December 2024
Primary Health Care: The WHO PHC Country Case Study Compendium
6 December 2024
Implementing the primary health care approach: a primer - WHO's report
11 September 2024
Strengthening primary health care leadership: Global capacity building course
Related health topics
Health systems
Palliative care
Other
Universal health coverage
Health systems
Health workforce
Health interventions
Rehabilitation