Chemical safety
Skip to main content
Overview
Chemical Safety is achieved by undertaking all activities involving chemicals in such a way as to ensure the safety of human health and the environment. It covers all chemicals, natural and manufactured, and the full range of exposure situations from
the natural presence of chemicals in the environment to their extraction or synthesis, industrial production, transport use and disposal.
Chemical safety has many scientific and technical components. Among these are toxicology, ecotoxicology and the process of chemical risk assessment which requires a detailed knowledge of exposure and of biological effects.
Through the International Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS), WHO works to establish the scientific basis for the sound management of chemicals, and to strengthen national capabilities and capacities for chemical safety.
Public health concern
Chemicals are part of our daily life. All living and inanimate matter is made up of chemicals and virtually every manufactured product involves the use of chemicals. Many chemicals can, when properly used, significantly contribute to the improvement of
our quality of life, health and well-being. But other chemicals are highly hazardous and can negatively affect our health and environment when improperly managed.
The production and use of chemicals continues to grow worldwide, particularly in developing countries. This is likely to result in greater negative effect on health if sound chemicals management is not ensured. Multisectoral action is urgently needed
to protect human health from the harmful effects of improperly managed chemicals.
WHO summarized scientific evidence and provides risk management recommendations for the
10 chemicals or groups of chemicals of major public health concern
.
Chemicals Road Map
The Seventieth World Health Assembly approved the
Road map
to enhance health sector engagement in the strategic approach to international chemicals management towards the 2020 goal and beyond. The WHO Secretariat has developed a
workbook
that offers a structured way to assist Member States to work through the
road map, choose priorities and plan activities.
One of the actions in the Chemicals road map mandates the Secretariat to establish a global chemicals and health network, with links to existing subregional, regional and international networks,
to facilitate health sector implementation of the road map. Over 70 Member States have joined the
WHO Global Chemicals and Health Network
with forty-one participating Member States attending the inaugural meeting of the Network held 5-8 November, 2018 in Geneva.
Roadmap and workbook
Identifying areas of primary focus for engagement and additional actions
The WHO Global Chemicals and Health Network
Facilitating health sector implementation of the road map
SAICM (Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management)
Guide efforts to produce and use chemicals in ways that minimize significant adverse impacts on human health and the environment
Intersessional process
Preparing recommendations regarding the Strategic Approach and the sound management of chemicals and waste beyond 2020
Fact sheets
Dioxins
Mercury
Pesticide residues in food
Lead poisoning
Asbestos
Electronic waste (e-waste)
Questions and answers
Lead poisoning
Chemical release and oil fires
Databases and tools
Regulations and controls on lead paint
Occupational Burden of Disease Application tool
Poison centres
Public health impact of chemicals: knowns and unknowns
Initiatives and groups
Chemical Risk Assessment Network
Elimination of mercury-containing skin lightening products
Elimination of mercury measuring devices in healthcare
Global Alliance to Eliminate Lead Paint
Global Chemicals and Health Network
Intergovernmental Forum on Chemical Safety
INTOX Network of Poisons Centres
Plastics and health initiative
Resolutions and decisions
WHA78.27 Galvanizing global support for a lead-free future
WHA 76.17 The impact of chemicals, waste and pollution on human health
WHA74 (25)   The role of the health sector in the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management towards the 2020 goal and beyond
WHA 70 (23)  The role of the health sector in the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management towards the 2020 goal and beyond
WHA 69.4  The role of the health sector in the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management towards the 2020 goal and beyond
WHA 67.11 Public health impacts of exposure to mercury and mercury compounds: the role of WHO and ministries of public health in the implementation of the Minamata Convention
WHA59.15 Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management
Training
UNICEF-WHO Introductory Course on Children’s Environmental Health
Technical work
Chemical Safety and Health
Environment, Climate Change and Health
News
All →
17 October 2025
Departmental update
No safe level: act now to end lead exposure
6 June 2025
Departmental update
New WHO online course series strengthens readiness for chemical hazards
18 October 2024
Departmental update
Global call to action on lead poisoning prevention
29 July 2024
Departmental update
WHO announces the 2024 updated Compendium of interventions on environmental health
Latest publications
All →
21 July 2025
Exposure to lead: a major public health concern: preventing disease through healthy environments, 4th...
Lead is a toxic metal whose widespread use has caused extensive environmental contamination and health
problems in many parts of the world. It is a cumulative...
Download
Read More
16 July 2025
International code of conduct on pesticide management: guidance on options for reducing risk when phasing...
This guidance covers different options for banning or phasing out a pesticide and suggests related risk reduction measures to be taken during the phase-out...
Download
Read More
6 June 2025
International code of conduct on pesticide management: guidance note on online sales of pesticides
Pesticides are widely used in agricultural
production, vector control and household pest control. In the era of rapid
internet and trade globalization,...
Download
Read More
12 May 2025
International code of conduct on pesticide management: guidance note on illegal trade of pesticides
The illegal trade in pesticides is a major global concern, particularly in low- and middle-income
countries. This issue has implications on human health,...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
5 June 2025
Ad hoc FAO/WHO expert meeting on water quality in agrifood systems and food safety implications – focus...
The Ad hoc FAO/WHO Expert Meeting on water quality in agrifood systems and food safety implications – focus on chemical contaminants was organized...
Download
Read More
7 April 2025
Report of Climate Resilient and Environmentally Sustainable Supply Chains in the Health Sector Expert...
This report summarizes the outcomes of the consultation that gathered global health organizations and key stakeholders to discuss strategies for achieving...
Download
Read More
7 October 2024
2024 List of resources and tools: Lead and lead in paint
The International Lead
Poisoning Prevention Week (ILPPW) takes place every year during the third week
of October. The focus of this year’s week...
Download
Read More
6 December 2023
Report of the Global Eliminating Mercury Skin Lightening Products (SLPs) Kick-off Meeting
The project Eliminating Mercury Skin Lightening Products (SLPs) was developed to reduce the risk of exposure to mercury added products through...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Assessing chemical risks in food
Harmonizing global approaches to chemical risk assessment
Managing environmental health risks in emergencies
Preventing impacts of electronic waste on child health
Providing information on the health effects of chemicals
Videos
All →
13 October 2025
Mercury exposure and health: Sixth COP meeting of the Minamata Convention on Mercury
13 October 2025
International Lead Poisoning Prevention Week of Action 2025 - message by Ruediger Krech, Director
24 September 2024
Video on International Lead Poisoning Prevention Week of Action 2024
16 February 2024
Introductory Course on Children's Environmental Health
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Fact: Lead is toxic
Infographic
What is lead?
Infographic
Lead exposure: early signs
Infographic
Lead exposure: long-term impacts
Events
All →
International lead poisoning prevention week
International Lead Poisoning Prevention Week 2025 - No safe level: act now to end lead exposure
19 – 25 October 2025
International lead poisoning prevention week
International Lead Poisoning Prevention Week 2024 - Bright futures begin lead free
20 – 26 October 2024
WHO Chemical Risk Assessment Network Webinar: Principles for addressing values in problem formulation
18 September 2024 15:00 – 16:00 CET
WHO Chemical Risk Assessment   Webinar: An Introduction to New Educational Courses for Chemicals Management and Environmental Health
13 June 2024 15:00 – 16:00 CET
Campaign
International Lead Poisoning Prevention Week 2024
The focus of this year’s campaign “Bright Futures begin Lead Free” reminds governments, civil society organizations, health partners, industry and others of the unacceptable risks of lead exposure and the need for action to protect children's health. The campaign builds on the success in outlawing the use of lead in petrol and the progress achieved by many countries in establishing laws that limit the use of lead in paint, particularly those paints to which children are exposed in their homes, schools and playgrounds.
Learn more about the campaign
Related health topics
Physical environment
Air pollution
Disasters
Chemical incidents
Physical environment
Children's environmental health
Physical environment
Food safety
Populations and demographics
Maternal health
Diseases and conditions
Snakebite envenoming
Socio-political determinants
Urban health