Nutrition
Skip to main content
Overview
Nutrition is a critical part of health and development. Better nutrition is related to improved infant, child and maternal health, stronger immune systems, safer pregnancy and childbirth, lower risk of non-communicable diseases (such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease), and longevity.
Healthy children learn better. People with adequate nutrition are more productive and can create opportunities to gradually break the cycles of poverty and hunger.
Malnutrition, in every form, presents significant threats to human health. Today the world faces a double burden of malnutrition that includes both undernutrition and overweight, especially in low- and middle-income countries. There are multiple forms of malnutrition, including undernutrition (wasting or stunting), inadequate vitamins or minerals, overweight, obesity, and resulting diet-related noncommunicable diseases.
The developmental, economic, social, and medical impacts of the global burden of malnutrition are serious and lasting for individuals and their families, for communities and for countries.
Learn about Nutrition and Food Safety and COVID-19
Impact
Most recent estimates show that globally, 149.2 million children under the age of 5 years of age are stunted (too short for their age) and 45.4 million are wasted (underweight for their height).  The number of children with stunting is declining in all regions except Africa. Over three-quarters of all children suffering from severe wasting live in Asia.
Around 45% of deaths among children under 5 years of age are linked to undernutrition. These mostly occur in low- and middle-income countries.
Anaemia is a serious global public health problem that particularly affects young children and pregnant women. WHO estimates that 40% of children less than 5 years of age and 37% of pregnant women worldwide are anaemic. Thirty percent of women of reproductive age have anaemia.
Globally, 1.9 billion adults are overweight or obese and 38.9 million children under 5 years of age are overweight. Rates of childhood overweight and obesity are rising, particularly in high-income and upper-middle-income countries.
Although breastfeeding protects against undernutrition and overweight, only 44% of infants under 6 months of age are exclusively breastfed.
High sodium consumption (>5 g salt/day) contributes to high blood pressure and increases the risk of heart disease and stroke. Most people consume too much salt – on average 9–12 grams per day, or around twice the recommended maximum level of intake.
WHO response
According to the 2016–2025 nutrition strategy, WHO uses its convening power to help set, align and advocate for priorities and policies that move nutrition forward globally; develops evidence-informed guidance based on robust scientific and ethical frameworks; supports the adoption of guidance and implementation of effective nutrition actions; and monitors and evaluates policy and programme implementation and nutrition outcomes.
This work is framed by the Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant, and young child nutrition, adopted by Member States through a World Health Assembly resolution in 2012. Actions to end malnutrition are also vital for achieving the diet-related targets of the Global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases 2013–2020, the Global strategy for women’s, children’s, and adolescent’s health 2016–2030, the report of the Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity (2016), and the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development.
In May 2018, the Health Assembly approved the 13th General Programme of Work (GPW13), which guides the work of WHO in 2019–2023. Reduction of salt/sodium intake and elimination of industrially produced trans-fats from the food supply are identified in GPW13 as part of WHO’s priority actions to achieve the aims of ensuring healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages.
Fact sheets
Anaemia
Healthy diet
Malnutrition
Obesity and overweight
Sodium reduction
Trans fat
Questions and answers
5 keys to a healthy diet
REPLACE trans fat
Databases and tools
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions (eLENA)
Child Growth Standards
Global database on the Implementation of Food and Nutrition Action (GIFNA)
Global targets tracking tool
Global Nutrition Monitoring Framework
Growth reference data for 5-19 years
Nutrition Landscape Information System (NLiS)
WHO Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition
Initiatives and groups
Expert Group for Updating Guidance on Indicators for the Assessment of Iodine Status
FAO/WHO nutrient requirements for children aged 0-36 months
Food Systems for Health
Guideline Development Group for Ultra-Processed Foods
Guideline Development Group on consumption of tropical oils
Guideline Development Group on optimal intake of animal-source foods
Nutrition Guidance Expert advisory Group (NUGAG)
REPLACE Trans Fat-Free by 2023
Strengthening national nutrition information systems (EC-NIS project)
Technical Expert Advisory Group on Nutrition Monitoring (TEAM)
UN Decade of Action on Nutrition
UNICEF/WHO Technical Advisory Group on Wasting and Nutritional Oedema (Acute Malnutrition)
WHO Trans Fat Elimination Technical Advisory Group (TFATAG)
Resolutions and decisions
WHA75(21), Maternal, infant and young child nutrition (2022)
A73/4 Add.2 Maternal, infant and young child nutrition (2020)
A72/58 Outcome of the Second
International Conference on Nutrition (2019)
WHA71.9 Infant and young child feeding (2018)
A71/22 Maternal, infant and young child nutrition: comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutrition (2018)
A71/23 Maternal, infant and young child nutrition: Safeguarding against possible conflicts of interest in nutrition programmes (2018)
Technical work
Nutrition and Food Safety
News
All →
26 September 2025
Departmental update
Countries and global leaders recognized for their action to tackle the obesity crisis
28 July 2025
Joint News Release
Global hunger declines, but rises in Africa and western Asia: UN report
27 May 2025
Departmental update
World Health Assembly re-commits to global nutrition targets and marketing regulations
19 May 2025
News release
WHO recognizes four countries with life-saving trans fat elimination policies
Publications
All →
24 October 2025
WHO guideline on fortification of edible oils and fats with vitamins A and D for public health
Vitamin A deficiency remains a leading cause of preventable blindness in children and also increases the risks of severe illness or death from infections....
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: topical briefs on maternal, infant and young child nutrition
Recognizing that the world is not on track to meet all of the 2025 global nutrition targets, WHO Member States, during the 78th World Health Assembly in...
Download
Read More
28 September 2025
Report of the 11th Meeting of the WHO Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts for Maternal,...
This is the report from the 11th meeting (June 10- 12 2025) of the strategic and technical advisory group of experts (STAGE) for maternal newborn child...
Download
Read More
24 September 2025
Infant and young child feeding: model chapter for textbooks for medical students and allied health professionals,...
The Model
Chapter, which was first published in 2009, brings together essential knowledge
about infant and young child feeding that health professionals...
Download
Read More
Our work
Addressing nutrition in emergencies
Measuring child growth through data
Reducing population sodium/salt intake
Establishing global nutrient requirements
Promoting safe food handling
Strengthening nutrition surveillance
Events
All →
Launch of WHO guideline on fortification of edible oils and fats with vitamins A and D for public health
17 November 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
12th Online Meeting of the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts (STAGE) for Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Nutrition (MNCAHN)
17 – 19 November 2025
Forty-eighth session of the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission adopts new standards
10 – 14 November 2025
Documents
All →
21 October 2025
Spreadsheets for WHO reference protocol for measuring fatty acids in foods, with emphasis on monitoring...
This document was prepared in support of the publication "WHO reference protocol for measuring fatty acids in foods, with emphasis on monitoring trans-fatty...
Download
Read More
18 September 2025
Nutrition and Food Safety News - July-August 2025
This edition of the NFS Newsletter features key activities we undertook in July and August 2025.
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
10 April 2025
Donors making a difference in support of WHO's global work for better nutrition for all
Facts in pictures
22 February 2018
Nutrition
Infographics
All →
Infographic
WHO SIDS Summit for Health
Infographic
Food Security is a Challenge in Small Island Developing States
Infographic
WHO Supports Small Island Developing States
Infographic
Nutrition ferritin - iron from your food
Videos
All →
12 August 2025
Food safety: turning information into action - Webinar by the WHO - 3 June 25
6 May 2024
Global sodium benchmarks for reducing sodium content in food products - WHO Webinar
4 March 2024
WHO's department of nutrition and food safety: key achievements 2023
20 February 2024
Trans fat elimination validation award ceremony - 29 January 2024
Podcasts
Episode #101 - Do sweeteners help with weight loss?
Do non-sugar sweeteners help with weight loss? Do they pose a risk to your health? What about so called “natural” sweetness like Stevia? Jason Montez explains the findings from the new WHO report in Science in 5.
Episode #91 - Everything you need to know about trans fat
WHO is urging action by Governments and the food industry to remove industrial trans fat from our food chain. Which foods contain trans fat? How do they harm us? WHO’s Dr Francesco Branca explains in Science in 5.
Related health topics
Conditions
Anaemia
Health interventions
Infant nutrition
Other
Food fortification
Diseases and conditions
Malnutrition
Physical environment
Food safety
Substances
Micronutrients
Human behaviour
Healthy diet
Conditions
Obesity