Soil-transmitted helminthiases
Skip to main content
Overview
Soil-transmitted helminth (STH) infections are among the most common
infections worldwide and affect the poorest and most deprived
communities. They are transmitted by eggs present in human faeces which
in turn contaminate soil in areas where sanitation is poor.
The main species that infect people are the roundworm (
Ascaris lumbricoides
), the whipworm (
Trichuris trichiura
) and the hookworms (
Necator americanus
and
Ancylostoma duodenale
).
Intestinal worms produce a wide range of symptoms including
intestinal manifestations (diarrhoea, abdominal pain), general malaise
and weakness. Hookworms cause chronic intestinal blood loss that result
in anaemia.
Soil-transmitted helminths are transmitted by eggs that are passed in
the faeces of infected people. Adult worms live in the intestine where
they produce thousands of eggs each day. In areas that lack adequate
sanitation, these eggs contaminate the
soil. This can happen in several ways:
eggs that are attached to vegetables are ingested when the vegetables are not carefully cooked, washed or peeled;
eggs are ingested from contaminated water sources;
eggs are ingested by children who play in the contaminated soil and then put their hands in their mouths without washing them.
Symptoms
Morbidity is related to the number of worms harboured. People with
infections of light intensity (few worms) usually do not suffer from the
infection. Heavier infections can cause a range of symptoms including
intestinal manifestations (diarrhoea
and abdominal pain), malnutrition, general malaise and weakness,
and impaired growth and physical development.
Infections of very high intensity can cause intestinal obstruction that should be treated surgically.
S. stercoralis
may cause dermatological and gastro-intestinal morbidity and is also
known to be associated with chronic malnutrition in children. In case of
reduced host immunity, the parasite can cause the
hyperinfection/dissemination syndrome
that is invariably fatal if not promptly and properly cured and
is often fatal despite the treatment.
In 2001, delegates at the World Health Assembly unanimously endorsed a
resolution (WHA54.19) urging endemic countries to start seriously
tackling worms, specifically schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted
helminths.
The strategy for control of soil-transmitted helminth
infections is to control morbidity through the periodic treatment of
at-risk people living in endemic areas. People at risk are:
preschool children
school-age children
women of reproductive age (including pregnant women in the second and third trimesters and breastfeeding women)
adults in certain high-risk occupations such as tea-pickers or miners.
Treatment
The WHO recommended medicines –albendazole (400 mg) and mebendazole
(500 mg) – are effective, inexpensive and easy to administer by
non-medical personnel (e.g. teachers). They have been through extensive
safety testing and have
been used in millions of people with few and minor side-effects.
Both
albendazole and mebendazole are donated to national ministries of
health through WHO in all endemic countries for the treatment of all
children of school age.
WHO has prequalified two formulations of generic ivermectin, which are available at affordable price in the
WHO catalogue
. Member States who are in need can make order through WHO.
Fact sheets
Soil-transmitted helminth infections
Questions and answers
Frequently asked questions on soil-transmitted helminthiases
Databases and tools
Interactive graph (Global Health Observatory)
Preventive chemotherapy data portal
Preventive chemotherapy data bank
Resolutions and decisions
Schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted helminth infections, 2001
| WHA54.19
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
News
All →
WHO guideline for public health control of strongyloidiasis: REVIEW
28 October 2024 | This Review, written by the strongyloidiasis guidelines development group along with WHO and international experts, presents a summary of the recently published WHO guideline recommendation for strongyloidiasis.
31 October 2024
Departmental update
New guidance to accelerate elimination of schistosomiasis and intestinal helminthiasis
2 August 2024
Departmental update
WHO releases guideline on public health control of human strongyloidiasis
10 June 2024
Departmental update
Findings of meta-analysis confirm MDA for STH is cost-effective
Our work
Establishing targets and monitoring progress towards the elimination of STH as a public health problem
Donating high‐quality medicines and diagnostics for the control of STH in children
Building capacity of national control programmes to implement WHO‐recommended strategies to eliminate STH
Providing evidence-based guidance to eliminate and control STH
Calls
16 May 2025
Call for consultation
Call for public consultation  ̶  Target Product Profiles (TPP) for Strongyloides stercoralis diagnostics
Publications
All →
20 December 2024
Global update on implementation of preventive chemotherapy against neglected tropical...
Weekly epidemiological record
Download
Read More
29 November 2024
Schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted helminthiases: progress report, 2023
Human infection with schistosomes and
soil-transmitted helminths is the cause
of clinical morbidity in many areas of
the world. Human schistosomiasis...
Download
Read More
24 July 2024
WHO guideline on preventive chemotherapy for public health control of strongyloidiasis ﻿
Human strongyloidiasis is a chronic parasitic disease caused by infection with Strongyloides
stercoralis, a soil-transmitted helminth that is estimated...
Download
Read More
External publications
All →
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTD)
The global progress of soil-transmitted helminthiases control in 2020 and World Health Organization targets...
Soil-transmitted helminth (STH) infections are the most widespread of the neglected tropical diseases, primarily affecting marginalized populations in...
Read More
10 Facts
14 February 2020
Soil-transmitted helminthiases
Multimedia
Infographic
Deadly infants, children and women for better health
21 August 2017
Deadly worms – A look at soil-transmitted helminths
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for
Soil-transmitted
and
helminth
and
infections or Intestinal
and
worms
Other related diseases
Strongyloidiasis
Partners
Save the children (CNTD)
Center for Neglected Tropical Diseases (KSTP)
Children Without Worms (CWW)
Global Network NTD (GNNTD)
Deworm the World (DtW)
Ivo de Carneri Foundation
Contact
Dr
Denise Mupfasoni
Technical Officer
mupfasonid@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Lymphatic filariasis (Elephantiasis)