Measles
Skip to main content
Overview
Measles is a highly contagious viral disease. It remains an important cause of death among young children globally, despite the availability of a safe and effective vaccine.
While vaccination has prevented an estimated 60 million deaths between 2000–2023, measles is still common in many developing countries, particularly in parts of Africa and Asia. An estimated 107 500 people died from measles in 2023. The overwhelming majority (more than 95%) of measles deaths occur in countries with low per capita incomes and weak health infrastructures.
Member States in all WHO Regions have adopted measles elimination goals. WHO is the lead technical agency responsible for coordination of immunization and surveillance activities supporting all countries to achieve these goals.
Symptoms
Measles is transmitted via droplets from the nose, mouth or throat of infected persons. Initial symptoms, which usually appear 10–14 days after infection, include high fever, a runny nose, bloodshot eyes, and tiny white spots on the inside of the mouth. Several days later, a rash develops, starting on the face and upper neck and gradually spreading downwards.
Severe measles is more likely among poorly nourished young children, especially those with insufficient vitamin A, or whose immune systems have been weakened by HIV/AIDS or other diseases. The most serious complications include blindness, encephalitis (an infection that causes brain swelling), severe diarrhoea and related dehydration, and severe respiratory infections such as pneumonia.
Prevention
Routine measles vaccination for children, combined with mass immunization campaigns in countries with low routine coverage, are key public health strategies to reduce global measles deaths.
The measles vaccine has been in use since the 1960s. It is safe, effective and inexpensive. WHO recommends immunization for all susceptible children and adults for whom measles vaccination is not contraindicated. Reaching all children with 2 doses of measles vaccine, either alone, or in a measles-rubella (MR), measles-mumps-rubella (MMR), or measles-mumps-rubella-varicella (MMRV) combination, should be the standard for all national immunization programmes.
Fact sheets
Rubella
Measles
Databases and tools
Measles - number of reported cases
Initiatives and groups
Measles & Rubella Initiative
Resolutions and decisions
WHA70.14 Strengthening immunization to achieve the goals of the global vaccine action plan
WHA56.20 Reducing global measles mortality
Technical work
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
Emergencies preparedness, response
News
All →
15 July 2025
Joint News Release
Global childhood vaccination coverage holds steady, yet over 14 million infants remain unvaccinated – WHO, UNICEF
14 November 2024
Joint News Release
Measles cases surge worldwide, infecting 10.3 million people in 2023
18 April 2024
News release
Leading health agencies outline updated terminology for pathogens that transmit through the air
16 November 2023
Joint News Release
Global measles threat continues to grow as another year passes with millions of children unvaccinated
Latest publications
All 	→
12 September 2025
Meeting of the South-East Asia Regional Working Group on Immunization New Delhi, India, 7–9 July 2025
The annual meeting of the South-East (SE) Asia Regional Working Group (RWG) on Immunization was held in a hybrid format in New Delhi, India, on 7–9...
Download
Read More
18 August 2025
Tenth Meeting of the WHO South-East Asia Regional Verification Commission for Measles and Rubella Elimination
The Regional Verification Commission for measles and rubella (MR) elimination for the WHO South-East Asia Region (SEA RVC) was established by the WHO Regional...
Download
Read More
14 January 2025
Targeted and selective strategies in measles and rubella vaccination campaigns: Interim guidance
The World Health Organization provides regional and national strategies and operational plans that aim to support countries in work to achieve measles...
Download
Read More
1 December 2024
Tenth South-East Asia Regional Meeting of Virologists of the Measles and Rubella Laboratory Network
Objectives of the meetingTo conduct a detailed desk review of performance of the measles and rubella (MR) laboratories against standard global monitoring...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Preparing and preventing epidemics and pandemics
Feature story
All →
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
28 February 2025
Donors making a difference: community engagement to promote, provide and protect the health and well-being of all
24 July 2024
﻿Donors making a difference: Japan supports WHO’s work to improve health services and emergency response
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Table 9.1. High concordance between first and second test results
Infographic
Table 9.2. Low concordance between first and second test results
Infographic
Flowchart for case classification of measles in non-elimination settings
Infographic
Wild-type measles virus infection and sensitivity of alternative sampling methods
Videos
All →
27 January 2025
Science in 5: Measles - A Growing Threat
25 April 2020
WHO: Why should I get vaccinated?
15 February 2019
Q&A on measles
6 December 2018
Five things to know about measles
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Child health
Populations and demographics
Newborn health
Diseases and conditions
Pneumonia
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization
Campaigns
World Immunization Week
24-30 April