Pneumonia
Skip to main content
Overview
Pneumonia is a form of acute respiratory infection that is most commonly caused by viruses or bacteria. It can cause mild to life-threatening illness in people of all ages, however it is the single largest infectious cause of death in children worldwide.
Pneumonia killed more than 808 000 children under the age of 5 in 2017, accounting for 15% of all deaths of children under 5 years.  People at-risk for pneumonia also include adults over the age of 65 and people with preexisting health problems.
The lungs are made up of small sacs called alveoli, which fill with air when a healthy person breathes. When an individual has pneumonia, the alveoli are filled with pus and fluid, which makes breathing painful and limits oxygen intake. These infections are generally spread by direct contact with infected people.
Vaccines can help prevent pneumonia.
Symptoms
Depending on the severity of the pneumonia, signs and symptoms may include:
Cough
Shortness of breath
Fever, sweating and shaking chills
Fatigue
Chest pain
Nausea, vomiting or diarrhea
Confusion, especially in older adults
Treatment
Pneumonia may be treated with antibiotics, if it is bacterial. The antibiotic of choice is amoxicillin dispersible tablets. Most cases of pneumonia require oral antibiotics, which are often prescribed at a health centre. These cases can also be diagnosed and treated with inexpensive oral antibiotics at the community level by trained community health workers. Hospitalization is recommended only for severe cases of pneumonia.
Rest and plenty of hydration can also help people recover quicker.
People of all ages can reduce their risk of pneumonia by:
Get vaccinated: Immunization against Hib, pneumococcus, measles, influenza and whooping cough (pertussis) is the most effective way to prevent pneumonia.
Wash your hands: Maintain good hygiene and washing your hands frequently, especially when caring for others who are sick or after blowing your nose, will keep germs from spreading.
Address environmental factors: Reduce indoor air pollution by providing affordable clean indoor stoves and stop smoking.
Maintain healthy lifestyle: Eat a healthy diet, rest and get regular exercise to help you stay well.
Adequate nutrition is key to improving natural defences, starting with exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months of life.
Fact sheets
Antimicrobial resistance
Immunization coverage
Household air pollution
Pneumonia in children
The top 10 causes of death
Questions and answers
Questions and answers on vaccines
Antibiotic resistance: Why vaccination is important
Databases and tools
Children aged < 5 years with pneumonia symptoms taken to a healthcare provider (%)
National policy on management of pneumonia among children
Resolutions and decisions
WHA76.3 Increasing access to medical oxygen
Technical work
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Ageing
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
News
All →
11 November 2025
Departmental update
World Pneumonia Day – 12 November 2025
22 November 2023
Statement
WHO statement on reported clusters of respiratory illness in children in northern China
9 December 2020
News release
WHO reveals leading causes of death and disability worldwide: 2000-2019
29 October 2018
News release
More than 90% of the world’s children breathe toxic air every day
Latest publications
All →
31 December 2024
Guideline on management of pneumonia and diarrhoea in children up to 10 years of age
Pneumonia and diarrhoea account for 23% of under-five mortality and were responsible for an estimated 1.17 million deaths in children under five globally....
Download
Read More
8 December 2024
WHO recommendations for management of serious bacterial infections in infants aged 0–59 days
The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed guidelines for the management of infants aged 0-59 days with serious bacterial infections (sepsis, meningitis,...
Download
Read More
31 August 2021
Portable digital radiography system: technical specifications
This WHO-IAEA joint publication takes its origin from a substantial and increased need from Member States, donor agencies and NGOs to use “portable”...
Download
Read More
17 October 2019
Exploratory meeting to review new evidence for Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (‎IMCI)‎ danger...
For children up to 5 years of age with common childhood illnesses, WHO’s IMCI
strategy recommends using clinical signs for diagnosis, treatment...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
All →
29 November 2023
WHO press conference on health situation in Gaza and Israel, COP28, and other issues – 29 November 2023
13 July 2022
Investing in solar power to rebuild Somalia’s health system: progress for Universal Health Coverage
9 April 2021
WHO’s Science in 5 on COVID-19 : Medical oxygen
25 February 2021
The life-saving power of medical oxygen
Feature story
All →
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
21 December 2023
Donors making a difference: thank you, contributors
17 April 2023
Donors making a difference: immunization
Campaigns
World Immunization Week
24-30 April
Related health topics
Physical environment
Children's environmental health
Human behaviour
Nutrition
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization
Physical environment
Air pollution
Populations and demographics
Child health