Sexual health
Skip to main content
Overview
Sexual health is fundamental to the overall health and well-being of individuals, couples and families, and to the social and economic development of communities and countries. Sexual health, when viewed affirmatively, requires a positive and respectful
approach to sexuality and sexual relationships, as well as the possibility of having pleasurable and safe sexual experiences, free of coercion, discrimination and violence. The ability of men and women to achieve sexual health and well-being depends
on their:
access to comprehensive, good-quality information about sex and sexuality;
knowledge about the risks they may face and their vulnerability to adverse consequences of unprotected sexual activity;
ability to access sexual health care;
living in an environment that affirms and promotes sexual health.
Sexual health-related issues are wide-ranging, and encompass sexual orientation and gender identity, sexual expression, relationships, and pleasure. They also include negative consequences or conditions such as:
infections with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and reproductive tract infections (RTIs) and their adverse outcomes (such as cancer and infertility);
unintended pregnancy;
sexual dysfunction;
sexual violence; and
harmful practices (such as female genital mutilation, FGM).
Definitions
WHO has been working in the area of sexual health since at least 1974, when the deliberations of an expert committee resulted in the publication of a technical report entitled “Education and treatment in human sexuality” (WHO, 1975).
Starting
in 2000, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) and WHO convened a number of expert consultations to review terminology and identify programme options. The culmination of these meetings was a Technical Consultation in 2002,  where the working
definitions of the key sexual health-related terms below were developed.
Sex
Sex refers to the biological characteristics that define humans as female or male. While these sets of biological characteristics are not mutually exclusive, as there are individuals who possess both, they tend to differentiate humans as males
and females.
In general use in many languages, the term sex is often used to mean “sexual activity”, but for technical purposes in the context of sexuality and sexual health discussions, the above definition is preferred.
Show less
Show more
Sexual health
According to the current working definition, sexual health is:
“…a state of physical, emotional, mental and social well-being in relation to sexuality; it is not merely the absence of disease, dysfunction or infirmity. Sexual health requires a positive and respectful approach to sexuality
and sexual relationships, as well as the possibility of having pleasurable and safe sexual experiences, free of coercion, discrimination and violence. For sexual health to be attained and maintained, the sexual rights of all persons must
be respected, protected and fulfilled.”
(WHO, 2006a)
Show less
Show more
Sexuality
Sexual health cannot be defined, understood or made operational without a broad consideration of sexuality, which underlies important behaviours and outcomes related to sexual health. The working definition of sexuality is:
“…a central aspect of being human throughout life encompasses sex, gender identities and roles, sexual orientation, eroticism, pleasure, intimacy and reproduction. Sexuality is experienced and expressed in thoughts, fantasies,
desires, beliefs, attitudes, values, behaviours, practices, roles and relationships. While sexuality can include all of these dimensions, not all of them are always experienced or expressed. Sexuality is influenced by the interaction of
biological, psychological, social, economic, political, cultural, legal, historical, religious and spiritual factors.”
(WHO, 2006a)
Show less
Show more
Sexual rights
There is a growing consensus that sexual health cannot be achieved and maintained without respect for, and protection of, certain human rights. The working definition of sexual rights given below is a contribution to the continuing dialogue
on human rights related to sexual health.The application of existing human rights to sexuality and sexual health constitute sexual rights. Sexual rights protect all people's rights to fulfil and express their sexuality and enjoy sexual
health, with due regard for the rights of others and within a framework of protection against discrimination." (WHO, 2006a, updated 2010)
“The fulfilment of sexual health is tied to the extent to which human rights are respected, protected and fulfilled. Sexual rights embrace certain human rights that are already recognized in international and regional human rights documents
and other consensus documents and in national laws.
Rights critical to the realization of sexual health include:
Rights critical to the realization of sexual health include:
the rights to equality and non-discrimination
the right to be free from torture or to cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment
the right to privacy
the rights to the highest attainable standard of health (including sexual health) and social security
the right to marry and to found a family and enter into marriage with the free and full consent of the intending spouses, and to equality in and at the dissolution of marriage
the right to decide the number and spacing of one's children
the rights to information, as well as education
the rights to freedom of opinion and expression, and
the right to an effective remedy for violations of fundamental rights.
The responsible exercise of human rights requires that all persons respect the rights of others.
Show less
Show more
Issues
“Human rights provide an international legal framework within which the sexual and reproductive health needs and aspirations of all people can be considered.”
(GRUSKIN, 2005)
In recent years, international human rights instruments have been increasingly used to support and advance legal claims by individuals and whole communities so that national governments will guarantee the respect, protection and fulfilment of their sexual and reproductive health rights (Cook et al., 2003). The working definitions and framework for programming presented here are grounded in internationally recognized human rights and offer a rights-based approach to programming in sexual health. The key conceptual elements of sexual health are listed below.
Key conceptual elements of sexual health
When viewed holistically and positively:
Sexual health is about well-being, not merely the absence of disease.
Sexual health involves respect, safety and freedom from discrimination and violence.
Sexual health depends on the fulfilment of certain human rights.
Sexual health is relevant throughout the individual’s lifespan, not only to those in the reproductive years, but also to both the young and the elderly.
Sexual health is expressed through diverse sexualities and forms of sexual expression.
Sexual health is critically influenced by gender norms, roles, expectations and power dynamics.
Sexual health needs to be understood within specific social, economic and political contexts.
Fact sheets
Abortion
Adolescent pregnancy
Candidiasis (yeast infection)
Endometriosis
Family planning/contraception methods
Female genital mutilation
Herpes simplex virus
HIV and AIDS
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Questions and answers
Adolescent sexual and reproductive health
Comprehensive sexuality education
Databases and tools
Policy database
Sexual Health Assessment of Practices and Experiences (SHAPE)
Technical work
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
News
All →
9 October 2025
Departmental update
WHO announces the development of new recommendations on HTLV-1
26 September 2025
Departmental update
New study reveals sex life impacts are major reasons for contraceptive discontinuation
10 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO announces the development of guidelines on multiplex testing
26 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO expands guidance on sexually transmitted infections and reviews country progress on policy implementation
Latest publications
All →
12 November 2024
Sexual, reproductive, maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health: report on the 2023 policy survey
Evidence- and rights-based national policies, guidelines and legislation play a key role in improving sexual, reproductive, maternal, newborn, child and...
Download
Read More
10 November 2024
List of key WHO-recommended maternal and newborn health commodities
This document provides a list of key WHO-recommended maternal and newborn health commodities and aims to accelerate progress towards the SDGs. It consolidates...
Download
Read More
15 October 2024
Transitioning to midwifery models of care: global position paper
The “Transitioning to Midwifery Models of Care: Global Position Paper” is a comprehensive document produced by the World Health Organization...
Download
Read More
5 April 2024
WHO recommendations on self-care interventions: availability of lubricants during sexual activity
Lubricants (also called personal lubricants) are usually liquid gels that can be used by individuals during sexual activity. There are many reasons that...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
We need to learn about healthy relationships and our rights
Infographic
We need to learn about safe sex and sexual health
Infographic
We need to learn about where to get information and help if we need it
Infographic
We need to learn about puberty and growing up
Related health topics
Human behaviour
Female genital mutilation
Human behaviour
Self-care for health and well-being
Diseases and conditions
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Socio-political determinants
Gender and health
Human behaviour
Violence against women
Videos
All →
4 December 2023
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights: Film Festival panel discussion at ECTMIH
9 November 2023
Self-care interventions for health
19 October 2023
HRP Statistics Portal: End-to-end research process in sexual and reproductive health research
30 August 2023
Sexual Health - Dr Lianne Gonsalves: HRP@50 Expert Series
Feature stories
All →
21 December 2023
Donors making a difference: thank you, contributors
4 July 2023
How self-care interventions are having an impact in Timor-Leste
5 April 2023
Expanding contraceptive access in Morocco
7 December 2022
In Nigeria, self-administered contraception is helping women to access their sexual and reproductive health rights
Events
All →
26 September 2025 13:00 – 14:00 UTC Time
Sex, satisfaction, and switching: the questions contraceptive research and implementation forgot to ask
4 September 2025
World Sexual Health Day 2025
26 – 30 July 2025
WHO at the STI & HIV 2025 World Congress