Yellow fever
Skip to main content
Overview
Yellow fever is a viral disease that is transmitted to humans by the bites of infected mosquitoes. It is prone to epidemics and is preventable with a vaccine.
These day-biting mosquitoes breed around houses (domestic), in forests or jungles (wild), or in both habitats (semi-domestic). Yellow fever is a high-impact, high-threat disease, with a risk of international spread, representing a potential threat to global health security.
There are 3 types of transmission cycles:
Sylvatic (or jungle) yellow fever spreads when monkeys are bitten by wild mosquitoes that pass the virus on to other monkeys and humans.
Intermediate yellow fever spreads when semi-domestic mosquitoes infect both monkeys and people. This is the most common type of outbreak in Africa.
Urban yellow fever can cause large epidemics when infected people introduce the virus into heavily populated areas with high mosquito density and where people have little immunity.
Occasionally, infected travellers have exported cases to countries that are free of yellow fever. However, the disease can only spread easily to a new country if there are mosquito species able to transmit it, specific climatic conditions, and the animal reservoir needed to maintain it.
Symptoms
Yellow fever can present with a wide range of symptoms and severity. Once contracted, the yellow fever virus incubates in the body for 3–6 days. Many people do not experience symptoms, but when these do occur, the most common are fever, muscle pain with prominent backache, headache, loss of appetite, and nausea or vomiting. In most cases, symptoms disappear after 3–4 days.
A small percentage of patients enter a second, more toxic phase within 24 hours of recovering from initial symptoms. High fever returns and several body systems are affected, usually the liver and kidneys.
In this phase, people are likely to develop jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eyes, hence the name yellow fever), dark urine, and abdominal pain with vomiting. Bleeding can occur from the mouth, nose, eyes, or stomach. Half of these patients die within 7–10 days.
Yellow fever is difficult to diagnose, especially during the early stages. More severe cases can be confused with severe malaria, leptospirosis, viral hepatitis (especially fulminant forms), other haemorrhagic fevers, infection with other flaviviruses (such as dengue haemorrhagic fever) and poisoning. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing in blood and urine can sometimes detect the virus in early stages of the disease. In later stages, testing to identify antibodies is needed (IgM).
Treatment
Yellow fever infections can cause serious illness and can be fatal in severe cases. Early supportive treatment in hospitals improves survival rates. There is currently no specific anti-viral drug for yellow fever, but specific care to treat dehydration, fever, and liver and kidney failure improves outcomes. Associated bacterial infections can be treated with antibiotics. Patients need to stay under mosquito nets during the day to limit the risk of spreading to others through mosquito bites.
Vaccination is the single most important measure for preventing yellow fever. The prevention of outbreaks can only be achieved if the majority of the population is immunized. The yellow fever vaccine is safe and affordable, and a single dose provides life-long immunity against the disease. People who recover from yellow fever infection are also protected for life.
Read more about the yellow fever vaccine.
Mosquito control can also help to prevent yellow fever and is vital in situations where vaccination coverage is low or the vaccine is not immediately available. Mosquito control includes eliminating sites where mosquitoes can breed and killing adult mosquitoes and larvae by using insecticides in areas with high mosquito density.
Community involvement through activities, such as cleaning household drains and covering water containers where mosquitoes can breed is an important and effective way to control mosquitoes.
Fact sheets
Yellow fever
Questions and answers
Yellow fever
Fractional doses of the yellow fever vaccine
Disease outbreak news
Latest yellow fever disease outbreak news
Weekly epidemiological record (WER)
Initiatives and groups
Eliminate yellow fever epidemics (EYE) 2017-2026
Training
Emergency risk communication training
Yellow fever learning resources
Pandemic and epidemic-prone diseases
Technical work
Emergencies
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
News
All →
10 July 2025
Departmental update
New WHO guidelines for clinical management of arboviral diseases: dengue, chikungunya, Zika and yellow fever
30 May 2025
Departmental update
Uganda achieves 92% coverage in accelerated yellow fever vaccination campaign
8 November 2023
Departmental update
WHO, UNICEF, and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance pass the mid-point of the global 10-year strategy to eliminate yellow fever epidemics
2 August 2023
News release
Technical Advisory Group on Arbovirus (TAG) meeting, Accra, Ghana
Latest publications
All →
8 August 2025
Target product profile on in vitro diagnostic assays for the detection of yellow fever in the context...
Yellow fever (YF) is an arboviral disease transmitted predominantly by mosquitoes of the Aedes and Haemagogus genera. From 2016 to 2018, the largest YF...
Download
Read More
16 July 2025
Policy considerations for strengthening preparedness and response to arbovirus epidemics and pandemics
The increasing incidence of arboviral outbreaks, such as dengue, chikungunya, and Zika, highlights the need for urgent and stronger preparedness and response...
Download
Read More
4 July 2025
WHO guidelines for clinical management of arboviral diseases: dengue, chikungunya, Zika and yellow fever
World Health Organization (WHO) has just released the Integrated Guidelines on the Clinical Management of Arboviral Diseases — a crucial step...
Download
Read More
9 June 2025
Performance of Certest Biotec’s VIASURE yellow fever real time PCR detection kit: assessment report and...
On a need’s basis, the Immunization Analysis and Insights, Vaccine Preventable Diseases (VPD) Surveillance and Risk Assessment Team of the World...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
22 May 2025
WHO Rapid Risk Assessment - Yellow fever, African Region v.4
This Rapid Risk Assessment (RRA) aims to assess the risk of yellow fever at the regional level, considering the public health impact, the risk of geographical...
Download
Read More
23 December 2024
Guideline Development Group for clinical management and diagnosis of dengue, chikungunya, Zika and yellow...
For the development of the guidelines for the clinical management and diagnosis of dengue, chikungunya, Zika and yellow fever, a Guideline Development...
Download
Read More
2 September 2024
Eliminate Yellow fever - Social media toolkit 2024
Background on the Eliminate Yellow
fever Epidemics (EYE) Strategy and
communication rationale. For more information or assistance, please email EYE.Strategy@who.int.
Download
Read More
1 September 2024
EYE Annual highlights 2023
Download
Read More
Multimedia
All →
Infographic
Yellow fever vaccine supply in an emergency
Infographic
Eliminate yellow fever epidemics by 2026
26 September 2016
WHO: EYE strategy - Working together for eliminating yellow fever epidemics
17 May 2016
WHO: Yellow fever – facts and challenges
Events
14 – 16 October 2025
Eighth global Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) strategy annual partners’ meeting 2025
18 June 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: yellow fever in Africa: what we know
11 June 2025 15:00 – 16:00 CET
WHO EPI-WIN Webinar: yellow fever in the Americas: what we know
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Chikungunya
Diseases and conditions
Dengue and severe dengue
Socio-political determinants
International Health Regulations
Socio-political determinants
Travel and health
Other
Universal health coverage
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization