Substandard and falsified medical products
Skip to main content
Overview
Up to two billion people around the world lack access to necessary medicines, vaccines, medical devices including in vitro diagnostics,  and other health products, which creates a vacuum that is too often filled by substandard and falsified products. This problem is growing as global supply chains become more complex, meaning products manufactured in one country may be packaged in a second country and distributed across borders to be marketed or sold to consumers in a third. The growth of e-commerce also contributes to this trend by making it easier to purchase medicines online, often from unauthorized sources.
WHO has identified this issue one of the urgent health challenges for the next decade given that more than one in ten medicines in low- and middle-income countries are estimated to be substandard or falsified. No country remains untouched from this issue, and WHO has received reports of substandard or falsified medical medicines, vaccines and in vitro diagnostics from all regions of the world. Both generic and innovator medicines can be falsified, ranging from very expensive products for cancer to very inexpensive products for treatment of pain.
WHO Member States have agreed on a comprehensive global strategy focused on prevention, detection and response to move towards achieving increased access to quality, safe, effective and quality medical products.
Impact
Substandard and falsified medical products create many problems for both the individual taking the medicine and for families, the larger society, health care system and supply chain. When medicines do not work the way they should, they can fail to treat
or prevent disease, contribute to antimicrobial resistance, waste precious resources and lead to a loss of confidence in medicines and distrust of healthcare providers. This can have a negative socioeconomic impact, contributing to related loss in
productivity and adding expenses to the individual and national health system.
They are most likely to reach patients in situations where there is constrained access to quality and safe medical products, poor governance and weak technical capacity. Although this issue impacts all countries, countries where there are weak or non-existent
regulatory systems bear the greatest burden of substandard and falsified medical products.
In an increasingly globalized world, no one country has sufficient resources and capacity to deal with this issue in isolation. Through global systems and processes such as the WHO Global Surveillance and Monitoring System and WHO Member State Mechanism,
Member States are working together to prevent, detect and respond to substandard and falsified medical products.
Fact sheets
Substandard and falsified medical products
Questions and answers
Scope, Scale and Harm
WHO Activities
Advice to Patients and Consumers
Contaminated medicines affecting children
Tools and toolkits
Substandard and falsified medical products training toolkit
Initiatives and groups
WHO Global Surveillance and Monitoring System (GSMS)
Resolutions and decisions
Member State mechanism on substandard and falsified medical products
Technical work
Regulation and Prequalification
Health product and policy standards
Medical Products Alerts Background
WHO Global Medical Products Alerts
Portal Access
News
All →
26 October 2025
Departmental update
South Africa launches National Action Plan to protect millions from substandard and falsified medical products
13 October 2025
Medical product alert
Medical Product Alert N°5/2025: Substandard (contaminated) oral liquid medicines
29 August 2025
Medical product alert
Medical Product Alert N°4/2025: Substandard (contaminated) FENTANILO HLB (fentanyl citrate)
24 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO and UNODC release landmark report on contaminated medicines, urging action to protect patients from preventable harm
Latest publications
All →
11 August 2025
Assessment of shelf life and storage conditions of registered oxytocin in the Southern African Development...
The value of oxytocin for various indications, including the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
(PPH) in obstetric practice, is well...
Download
Read More
25 March 2025
Report of existing technologies used to screen and detect substandard and falsified medical products
Regulatory authorities are responsible for overseeing medical products and are
tasked with the prevention, detection, and response to substandard and...
Download
Read More
21 March 2025
Country experiences on implementation of traceability for medical products
Traceability systems offer the technical possibility to trace medical products along
the supply chain – from final stage manufacture to the ultimate...
Download
Read More
3 December 2024
Global surveillance and monitoring system for substandard and falsified medical products: activity report,...
Access to safe, effective medical products is paramount for global health. This report describes a critical role of WHO in ensuring the quality and safety...
Download
Read More
Medical product alerts
Substandard & Falsified
Medical product alerts
Safety information for medical devices inc. in vitro diagnostics
Notices of Concern/Suspension of Prequalified Medical Products
Member State Mechanism
Substandard and falsified medical products - Governance
Substandard and falsified medical products - Policy and technical guidance
Resources
SF Background Information
Post market surveillance
Post market surveillance for IVDs
Feature stories
24 June 2025
Sri Lanka pioneers global effort to reduce corruption in health products
Videos
All →
20 January 2020
Les médicaments de qualité inférieure et falsifiés
20 January 2020
Substandard and falsified medicines kill hundreds of thousands of people globally
Photo story
13 January 2020
Urgent health challenges for the next decade
Related health topics
Health systems
Health systems governance
Health interventions
In vitro diagnostics
Socio-political determinants
Intellectual property and trade
Health interventions
Medical devices
Health interventions
Medicines
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization