Smallpox
Skip to main content
Overview
Smallpox is an acute contagious disease caused by the variola virus, a member of the orthopoxvirus family. It was one of the most devastating diseases known to humanity and caused millions of deaths before it was eradicated. It is believed to have existed
for at least 3000 years.
The smallpox vaccine, created by Edward Jenner in 1796, was the first successful vaccine to be developed. He observed that milkmaids who previously had caught cowpox did not catch smallpox and showed that a similar inoculation could be used to prevent
smallpox in other people.
The World Health Organization launched an intensified plan to eradicate smallpox in 1967. Widespread immunization and surveillance were conducted around the world for several years. The last known natural case was in Somalia in 1977. In 1980 WHO declared
smallpox eradicated – the only infectious disease to achieve this distinction. This remains among the most notable and profound public health successes in history.
Symptoms
Early symptoms of smallpox include high fever, fatigue and severe back pain, and less often, abdominal pain and vomiting. Two to 3 days later the virus produces a characteristic rash with bumps full of a clear liquid, which later fill with pus and finally
develop a crust that dries and falls off. The rash begins on the face and hands, then spreads to the rest of the body. Lesions develop in the mucous membranes of the nose and mouth and ulcerate soon after formation.
Smallpox is transmitted from person to person via infective droplets during close contact with infected people who have symptoms of the disease, or in some cases through contaminated clothing and bedding. It has an incubation period of 7–17 days
after exposure and only becomes infectious once a fever develops. People remain infectious until the last scabs fall off.
Smallpox was fatal in up to 30% of cases.
WHO smallpox recognition card
WHO response
The period since eradication has been defined by a lengthy and complex debate focussed on the destruction of the last remaining stocks of live variola virus. In 1996, at the 49th World Health Assembly, Member States decided to have this stock destroyed
in June 1999, and only to allow small samples to be kept for research purposes at two designated secure laboratories – one in the United States and one in the Russian Federation. Temporary retention of the existing stocks of variola virus are
used for further essential research, which is overseen by the Advisory Committee for Variola Virus Research. This group meets on an annual basis.
The WHO Smallpox Secretariat
based in WHO Headquarters coordinates all smallpox eradication-related and post-eradication activities. These include overseeing permitted
research with live variola virus for the development of countermeasures such as vaccine and antivirals. Since the eradication era, safer vaccines and specific treatments have been developed for smallpox and related diseases such as
monkeypox
. The Secretariat is also responsible for emergency preparedness and manages a
smallpox vaccine
emergency stockpile in the unlikely event that the disease re-emerges. The Secretariat manages the
biosafety and biosecurity inspections
of the authorized variola virus repositories as mandated by the World Health Assembly, and ensures
annual reporting
to WHO Governing Bodies. The Smallpox Secretariat supports WHO Archives in preserving the global history of smallpox and documenting the lessons learned from successful eradication of smallpox.
The
WHO Smallpox
Secretariat's
current roles and responsibilities include:
Variola virus research and development of countermeasures
organizing annual meetings of the
WHO Advisory Committee on Variola Virus Research (ACVVR)
coordinating review of
research
proposals
for work with variola virus through the ACVVR
managing relationships with the two variola virus repositories (which are also WHO Collaborating Centres)
recording, processing and monitoring requests from researchers for variola virus DNA from the 2 repositories under specific rules
conducting biennial
biosafety and biosecurity inspections
of the 2 global variola virus repositories
developing normative guidance regarding
research on variola virus DNA
and related matters
Emergency preparedness and response
coordinating and preparing normative guidance on development and use of medical countermeasures for orthopoxviruses
developing preparedness and response strategies, and tools to implement preparedness measures
maintaining and managing the
smallpox global vaccine stockpile
coordinating development of a laboratory network for orthopoxvirus detection and diagnostics
developing normative guidance and response strategies for human
monkeypox
and other orthopoxviruses
supporting capacity-building and developing training materials
contributing to global health security initiatives
Preserving global smallpox history
overseeing the
Smallpox Eradication Programme archives
in collaboration with
WHO Archives
and the
WHO Library
leading on policy discussions and
commemorative events
regarding smallpox eradication
reporting annually to the
WHO Executive Board
and the
World Health Assembly
The Secretariat also
mobilizes and manages funding
for these activities and for ad hoc events as required such as technical consultations and training.
Show less
Show more
Q & A
Smallpox Q & A
WHA resolutions
All WHA reports, decisions and resolutions
Reports and publications
WHO Advisory Committee on Variola Virus Research meeting reports
Committee on Orthopoxvirus Infections meeting reports
Biosafety inspection reports
The Independent Advisory Group on Public Health Implications of Synthetic Biology Technology Related to Smallpox
Advisory group of Independent Experts (AGIES) to review the smallpox research programme
Post-eradication of smallpox
Read more on post-eradication
Preparedness and response
Preparedness
in case of any kind of smallpox event requires national and international attention
Case definition for smallpox
Clinical diagnosis
Diagnostics
Vaccines
WHO teams
Communicable Diseases
Archived disease outbreak news
2000 - Accidental exposure to smallpox vaccine in the Russian Federation
Eradicated 1980
a global achievement
For at least 3000 years smallpox had devastated humanity.
Our work
Research using live variola virus
Variola virus repository safety inspections
10 November 2021
Case study
Orthopoxvirus laboratory survey
Smallpox eradication
1 December 2017
Preparedness in the event of a smallpox outbreak
28 June 2016
Post-eradication
31 May 2016
Smallpox vaccines
1 June 2015
Synthetic biology technologies
1 May 2010
Smallpox Eradication Programme - SEP (1966-1980)
Archives of the smallpox eradication programme
News
All →
8 May 2020
News release
Commemorating Smallpox Eradication – a legacy of hope, for COVID-19 and other diseases
8 May 2020
News release
UN issues a stamp to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the eradication of smallpox
13 December 2019
News release
WHO commemorates the 40th anniversary of smallpox eradication
17 May 2010
Note for Media
Statue commemorates smallpox eradication
Publications
All 	→
14 November 2024
WHO Advisory Committee on Variola Virus Research: report of the 26th meeting, Geneva, Switzerland, 13-14...
WHO Advisory Committee on Variola Virus Research: report of the 26th meeting, Geneva, Switzerland, 13-14 November 2024
Download
Read More
10 May 2024
WHO inspection report of the variola virus repository at CDC, 6-10 May 2024
Report of the World Health
Organization‎ biosafety and biosecurity inspection team of the
Variola Virus maximum containment laboratories...
Download
Read More
25 October 2023
WHO advisory Committee on Variola Virus Research: report of the 25th meeting, Geneva, Switzerland, 25-26...
The World Health Organization (WHO) Advisory Committee on variola virus Research (ACVVR), held its twenty-fifth meeting on 25-26 October 2023. The recommendations...
Download
Read More
7 October 2023
WHO Inspection report of the variola virus repository at VECTOR, 2-7 October 2023
Report of the World Health Organization (‎WHO)‎ Biosafety and Biosecurity Inspection Team of the Variola Virus Maximum Containment Laboratories...
Download
Read More
Videos
7 April 2023
Smallpox eradication: science, solutions, solidarity
8 May 2020
Dr Tedros on the milestone of smallpox eradication and lessons learned for COVID-19 response
7 May 2020
40th anniversary of smallpox eradication
13 December 2019
Commemoration of 40 years since smallpox eradication - live stream 13 December 2019
Related health topics
Socio-political determinants
International Health Regulations
Diseases and conditions
Mpox
Related links
History of smallpox vaccination
OpenWHO
Risk communication
Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN)
WHO's governing bodies
Contact
For any request please send us an email to:
SmallpoxSecretariat@who.int