Leishmaniasis
Skip to main content
Overview
The leishmaniases are a group of diseases caused by protozoan parasites from more than 20
Leishmania
species. These parasites are transmitted to humans by the bite of an infected female phlebotomine sandfly, a tiny – 2–3 mm long – insect vector.
There are three main forms of the disease: cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL), visceral leishmaniasis (VL), also known as kala-azar, and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (MCL). CL is the most common form, VL is the most severe form and MCL is the most disabling form of the disease.
Most people who become infected with the parasite do not develop any symptoms during their lifetime. Therefore, the term
leishmaniasis
refers to the condition of becoming sick due to a
Leishmania
infection, not to being infected with the parasite.
Today, more than 1 billion people live in areas endemic for leishmaniasis and are at risk of infection. An estimated 30 000 new cases of VL and more than 1 million new cases of CL occur annually.
Symptoms
CL usually produces ulcers on the exposed parts of the body, such as the face, arms and legs. There may be many lesions – sometimes up to 200 – which can cause serious disability. When the ulcers heal, they invariably leave permanent scars, which can lead to stigmatization, especially for women and girls.
VL is characterized by irregular bouts of fever, substantial weight loss, swelling of the spleen and liver and serious anaemia. If the disease is not treated, the fatality rate can be as high as 100% within 2 years.
MCL produces lesions that can partially or totally destroy the mucous membranes of the nose, mouth and throat cavities and surrounding tissues. This disabling form can also lead to social exclusion.
PKDL (post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis), a complication of VL, is mainly seen in East Africa and South-East Asia. It is characterized by a discoloured (hypopigmented) flat skin (macular) rash, combined with some slightly elevated (maculopapular) or elevated (nodular) rash, usually in patients who have recovered from VL. PKDL usually appears 6 months to 1 or more years after apparent cure of VL, but it may occur earlier or even concurrently with VL, especially in Sudan. PKDL heals spontaneously in most cases in Africa but rarely in patients in India.
Treatment
Antileishmanial treatment depends on the causative species and the condition of the patient (e.g. pregnancy, immunosuppression).
Regardless of the causative
Leishmania
species, antileishmanial treatment cannot provide a sterile cure, and the parasite remains in the human body and can cause a relapse when there is immunosuppression.
Treatment is complex and should be administered by highly experienced health personnel. Most antileishmanial medicines are injectable.
Fact sheets
Leishmaniasis
Questions and answers
Frequently asked questions on leishmaniasis
Databases and tools
Status of endemicity of cutaneous leishmaniasis, worldwide, 2022
Status of endemicity of visceral leishmaniasis, worldwide, 2022
Global distribution of leishmaniasis and countries reporting HIV/Leishmania coinfection
Interactive graph for cutaneous leishmaniasis (Global Health Observatory)
Data on leishmaniasis (Global Health Observatory)
Country profiles
Essential Maps
Resolutions and decisions
Control of leishmaniasis, 2007
| WHA60.13
Initiatives and groups
Skin NTDs Laboratory Network (Skin NTDs LABNET)
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
News
All →
26 May 2025
Departmental update
Progress for NTDs: two resolutions adopted at WHA78
22 May 2025
Departmental update
African Nations unite to eliminate  visceral leishmaniasis and boost cross-border collaboration for NTDs
1 April 2025
Departmental update
Global meeting calls for stronger partnerships to tackle skin NTDs
24 March 2025
Departmental update
Second global meeting on skin NTDs focuses on advancing integration and innovation
WHO Academy Course
Visceral leishmaniasis East Africa
Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis: training of health workers on skin-NTDs
Events
14 October 2025 18:00 – 19:30 IST
Sustaining gains, expanding horizons – From a 20-year journey of regional kala-azar elimination commitment and innovation
Calls
3 October 2025
Call for consultation
Survey : WHA resolution on skin diseases as a global public health priority
27 February 2024
Call for consultation
Public Notice and Comments on the Guideline Development Group (GDG) for Leishmaniasis Vector and Reservoir Control
Working Groups
WHO Skin NTDs Working Groups (office.com)
Following the Skin NTD Meeting held in Geneva, Switzerland from 27-31 March 2023, WHO is proposing to establish different INFORMAL WORKING GROUPS to help follow up of the main outcomes and keep the momentum.
Our work
Implementing a global surveillance system for leishmaniasis
Supplying antileishmanial medicines to the most vulnerable populations
Capacity‐building for health workers dealing with leishmaniasis
Eliminating visceral leishmaniasis as a public health problem in the South‐East Asia Region
Promoting the integrated approach to skin-related neglected tropical diseases
Publications
All →
7 November 2025
Global leishmaniasis surveillance updates 2024: consolidating gains and new initiatives
Weekly epidemiological record
Download
Read More
13 June 2025
Skin health for all: update on skin neglected tropical diseases with a focus on Buruli ulcer and yaws
Skin diseases in general are the third most prevalent cause of illness, with almost 5 billion incident cases of skin and subcutaneous diseases, and...
Download
Read More
25 January 2025
Elimination of visceral leishmaniasis as a public health problem in Kenya – progress and challenges
Leishmaniasis is one of several endemic
neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) in
Kenya. The disease occurs mainly
in 3 clinical forms: visceral leishmaniasis...
Download
Read More
Interactive timeline of facts
This interactive timeline provides some insight into the disease history with inspiring moments. It consists of short stories grouped into six categories (epidemiology, disease control, partnership, vector control, case management and policy) identified by different colours.
A display panel at the bottom right corner of the window (tool icon) can be used to select and display one or several specific categories.
The timeline can be viewed either in 2D or in 3D by clicking the bottom left corner button.
Navigating is easy by scrolling up or down using the mouse.
Access the timeline
Multimedia
Infographic
Keeping the vector out
Infographic
Vector-borne diseases
Infographic
Unveiling the neglect of leishmaniasis
20 November 2017
The Global Epidemiology of Leishmaniasis
20 July 2017
Life-cycle of leishmaniasis in humans
31 December 2015
What is leishmaniasis?
14 October 2014
Life cycle of Leishmania in the insect vector
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for
leishmaniasis
WHO Collaborating centers
Fundacion Centro Internacional de Entrenamiento e Investigaciones Médicas (CIDEIM)
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Instituto Ramón y Cajal de investigación Sanitaria
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr. José Ruiz Postigo
Medical officer
postigoj@who.int
Dr. Saurabh Jain
Scientist
jainsau@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Yaws (Endemic treponematoses)
Communicable diseases
Buruli ulcer  (Mycobacterium ulcerans infection)
Diseases and conditions
Leprosy (Hansen disease)
Diseases and conditions
Lymphatic filariasis (Elephantiasis)