Self-care for health and well-being
Skip to main content
Overview
Self-care is the ability of individuals, families and communities to promote health, prevent disease, maintain health, and cope with illness and disability with or without the support of a health worker.
Currently 3.6 billion people – half of the world – lack access to essential health services. WHO recommends self-care interventions for every country and economic setting, as a critical path to reach universal health coverage, promote
health, keep the world safe, and serve the vulnerable.
Self-care recognises individuals as active agents in managing their own health care, in areas including health promotion; disease prevention and control; self-medication; providing care to dependent persons, and rehabilitation, including palliative
care.
Self-care interventions are evidence-based,
quality tools
that support self-care. They include medicines, counselling, diagnostics and/or digital technologies which can be accessed fully or partially outside of formal health services. Depending on
the intervention, they can be used with or without the direct supervision of health workers.
Self-care interventions can:
empower individuals and communities to manage their health and well-being
strengthen national institutions with efficient use of domestic resources for health
improve primary healthcare (PHC) and contribute to achieving UHC
Approach
A people-centred approach
Self-care interventions support the needs and rights of individuals through a
people-centred approach
that is grounded in human rights and gender equality.
This is a holistic approach to the health and well-being of each person, taking account of their circumstances, needs and desires across a lifetime, as well as the environment in which they live.
Self-care is the power of individuals to prevent and treat diseases themselves, in the context of a safe and supportive enabling environment. It does not replace the health care system, but instead provides additional choices and options for health care.
Available, accessible, affordable, acceptable and good quality self-care interventions are core components of promoting and protecting people’s right to health. Self-care interventions can improve the efficiency of health service delivery, access and coverage.
This requires supportive laws and policies, health financing, regulated quality products and interventions, and education which promotes the participation of individuals, as well as privacy and confidentiality.
Human rights considerations help to reduce violence, coercion, stigma and discrimination by improving each person’s exercise of their right to health, information, and independent decision-making.
Emergency context
Pandemics and humanitarian crises
In situations where existing health systems are stretched, there is often an unprecedented demand on individuals and communities to manage their health.
Innovative strategies that go beyond the conventional health sector response is urgently needed given that:
a record 274 million people are currently in need of humanitarian assistance and protection and disease outbreaks are a constant global threat
at least 400 million people worldwide lack access to the most essential health services.
1 in 5 of the world’s population are now living in humanitarian crises, in which health systems are challenged to deliver essential services.
Self-care interventions can provide valuable, additional options to the usual health facility- or health worker-based services, as part of a supportive health system.
This is particularly relevant during a pandemic like COVID-19, when self-isolation and physical distancing measures make it more difficult for people to access their normal health care services and medications and national health systems can be disrupted.
WHO includes self-care interventions as priority actions in
operational guidance
on maintaining essential health services for the COVID-19 context.
Fact sheets
Self-care for health and well-being
Questions and answers
Self-care for health and well-being
Databases and tools
Policy database
Your life, your health – Tips and information for health and well-being
Technical work
Digital Health and Innovation
Global HIV, Hepatitis and STIs Programme
Health Systems Governance and Financing
Health workforce
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health, and Ageing
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
News
All →
15 July 2025
Departmental update
New digital tool to support self-monitoring of blood pressure in pregnancy
25 September 2024
Departmental update
WHO launches online learning programme to increase access to contraception via pharmacies
24 July 2024
Departmental update
WHO releases new guidance to help countries integrate self-care within health care
4 April 2024
Departmental update
The Self-Care Wheel: an award-winning innovation to advance sexual and reproductive health and rights
Latest publications
All →
15 July 2025
Digital adaptation kit for self-monitoring of blood pressure during pregnancy: operational requirements...
The Digital adaptation kit (DAK) for self-monitoring blood pressure during pregnancy enables countries to better help pregnant women manage hypertensive...
Download
Read More
26 September 2024
Self-care interventions for sexual and reproductive health and rights: country cases
People play an essential role in managing their own sexual and reproductive health and rights (SRHR) and as caregivers. This publication looks at self-care...
Download
Read More
17 July 2024
Implementation of self-care interventions for health and well-being: guidance for health systems
Building upon the latest normative recommendations
and good practice statements from the World
Health Organization (WHO), this guidance includes
key...
Download
Read More
8 May 2024
Long-term care for older people: package for universal health coverage
This publication includes a list of LTC interventions that all
countries could consider, prioritize and provide and could
integrate within health and...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
24 September 2025
Self-care interventions for health and well-being: Communications Toolkit 2025
This toolkit supports communication on the WHO guideline on self-care interventions for health and well-being, 2022 revision. This guideline provides a...
Download
Read More
24 July 2025
Value of self-care for advancing sexual and reproductive health and rights
Self-care refers to the ability of individuals, families and
communities to promote health, prevent disease, maintain
health and cope with illness,...
Download
Read More
23 April 2025
Accelerating sexual and reproductive health and rights (SRHR) self-care interventions among underserved...
This two-year generic implementation research protocol has been developed to build the evidence base on how self-care interventions for sexual and reproductive...
Download
Read More
13 November 2023
Implementation Research on DMPA-SC Self-Injection
In recent years, evidence from pilot projects has demonstrated that self-injection of subcutaneous Depo-Medroxyprogesterone Acetate (DMPA-SC) is safe,...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
13 February 2024
Using art to increase condom awareness
4 July 2023
How self-care interventions are having an impact in Timor-Leste
5 April 2023
Expanding contraceptive access in Morocco
6 March 2023
Self-management of medical abortion via telemedicine in Germany
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Self-management of medical abortion is one of the safe and effective options of abortion care
Infographic
Health workers can promote access to and correct use of self-care interventions
Infographic
Self-care interventions grounded in human rights promote:
Infographic
Self-care interventions can help reduce health costs
Videos
All →
9 November 2023
Self-care interventions for health
23 July 2023
Self-care interventions for health and well-being - Dr Manjulaa Narasimhan: HRP@50 Expert Series
17 July 2023
Self-care interventions in fragile and humanitarian contexts
4 August 2022
Self-care interventions: WHO's webinar about equitable access and results from the GVP survey
Podcasts
Episode #36 - Safe care at home
If you are caring for yourself or a loved one at home, how can you keep everyone safe? Who should be cared for at home? How to prevent COVID-19 infection to other family members? What red flags should you look for that tell you it is time to contact the health care provider? WHO’s Dr April Baller explains in Science in 5.
Events
All →
WHO at the STI & HIV 2025 World Congress
26 – 30 July 2025
Self-Care Month 2025
24 June – 24 July 2025
Related health topics
Health systems
Health financing
Behavioural interventions
Health promotion
Health systems
Health workforce
Communicable diseases
HIV
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Health systems
Primary health care
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health
Diseases and conditions
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Other
Universal health coverage