Schistosomiasis (Bilharzia)
Skip to main content
Overview
Schistosomiasis is a disease of poverty that leads to chronic
ill-health. Infection is acquired when people come into contact with
fresh water infested with the larval forms (cercariae) of parasitic
blood flukes, known as schistosomes. The microscopic adult worms live in
the veins draining the urinary tract and intestines. Most of the eggs
they lay are trapped in the tissues and the body’s reaction to them can
cause massive damage.
Schistosomiasis affects almost 240 million people worldwide, and
more than 700 million people live in endemic areas. The infection is
prevalent in tropical and sub-tropical areas, in poor communities
without potable water and adequate sanitation. Urogenital
schistosomiasis is caused by Schistosoma haematobium and intestinal
schistosomiasis by any of the organisms
S. guineensis, S. intercalatum, S. mansoni, S. japonicum
, and
S. mekongi
.
Several million people all over the world suffer from severe morbidity as a consequence of schistosomiasis.
The WHO strategy on use of anthelminthic drugs now makes it possible to
control schistosomiasis in poor and marginalized communities, in
conjunction with interventions against lymphatic filariasis,
onchocerciasis and soil transmitted helminthiasis. In highly endemic
areas, severe morbidity due to schistosomiasis can be prevented by
regular treatment of at risk groups targeted based on community
diagnosis based on sentinel groups. Praziquantel has been safely
co-administered with albendazole and ivermectin, in areas where these
drugs have been used separately for preventive chemotherapy.
Symptoms
Symptoms of schistosomiasis are caused by the body’s reaction to the worms' eggs.
Intestinal schistosomiasis can result in abdominal pain, diarrhoea, and blood in the stool. Liver enlargement is common in advanced cases, and is frequently associated with an accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity and hypertension of the abdominal blood vessels. In such cases there may also be enlargement of the spleen.
The classic sign of urogenital schistosomiasis is haematuria (blood in urine). Fibrosis of the bladder and ureter, and kidney damage are sometimes diagnosed in advanced cases. Bladder cancer is another possible complication in the later stages. In women, urogenital schistosomiasis may present with genital lesions, vaginal bleeding, pain during sexual intercourse, and nodules in the vulva. In men, urogenital schistosomiasis can induce pathology of the seminal vesicles, prostate, and other organs. This disease may also have other long-term irreversible consequences, including infertility.
The economic and health effects of schistosomiasis are considerable and the disease disables more than it kills. In children, schistosomiasis can cause anaemia, stunting and a reduced ability to learn, although the effects are usually reversible with treatment.
Treatment
Praziquantel is the recommended treatment against all forms of
schistosomiasis. It is effective, safe, and low-cost. Even though
re-infection may occur after treatment, the risk of developing severe
disease is diminished and even reversed when treatment is initiated and
repeated in childhood.
Schistosomiasis control has been
successfully implemented over the past 40 years in several countries,
including Brazil, Cambodia, China, Egypt, Mauritius, Islamic Republic of
Iran, Oman, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Morocco, Tunisia, etc. In Burundi,
Burkina Faso, Ghana, Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, the United Republic of
Tanzania, and Yemen, it has been possible to scale-up schistosomiasis
treatment to the national level and have an impact on the disease in a
few years. An assessment of the status of transmission is required in
several countries.
Over the past 10 years,
there has been scale-up of treatment campaigns in a number of
sub-Saharan countries, where most of those at risk live.
Fact sheets
Schistosomiasis
Questions and answers
Frequently Asked Questions on Schistosomiasis (bilharzia)
What are genital manifestations of schistosomiasis
Databases and tools
Global Health Observatory (GHO) interactive graph
Schistosomiasis databank
Preventive chemotherapy data portal
Proportion of global population requiring preventive chemotherapy against schistosomiasis, 2018
Resolutions and decisions
Global vector control response: an integrated approach for the control of vector-borne diseases
| WHA70.16
Elimination of schistosomiasis, 2012
| WHA65.21
Schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted helminth infections, 2001
| WHA54.19
Schistosomiasis, 1976
| WHA29.58
Schistosomiasis, 1975
| WHA28.53
Bilharziasis, 1950
| WHA3.26
Technical
work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
Events
16 – 17 September 2025
Informal consultation on genital schistosomiasis
News
All →
31 December 2024
Departmental update
A tribute to President Jimmy Carter
31 October 2024
Departmental update
New guidance to accelerate elimination of schistosomiasis and intestinal helminthiasis
18 October 2024
Departmental update
In memoriam Professor Emeritus Michael Doenhoff (1946 –2024)
Our work
Enhancing  implementation of schistosomiasis control and elimination programmes
Expanding preventive chemotherapy to all in need
Increasing awareness on genital manifestations of schistosomiasis
Reinforcing snail control activities for schistosomiasis
External publications
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTD)
Effect of preventive chemotherapy with praziquantel on schistosomiasis among school-aged children in...
Over the past 20 years, schistosomiasis control has been scaled up. Preventive chemotherapy with praziquantel is the main intervention. We aimed to assess...
Read More
Publications
All →
31 August 2025
Routine health information system and health facility data for neglected tropical...
This guidance was developed based on a template provided to health programmes by the WHO Division of Data, Analytics and Delivery for Impact. WHO disease...
Download
Read More
20 December 2024
Global update on implementation of preventive chemotherapy against neglected tropical diseases (‎NTDs)‎...
Summary of preventive chemotherapy (PC) in
2023
PC is defined as large-scale delivery of safe, single-administration, quality-assured medicines, either...
Download
Read More
29 November 2024
Schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted helminthiases: progress report, 2023
Human infection with schistosomes and
soil-transmitted helminths is the cause
of clinical morbidity in many areas of
the world. Human schistosomiasis...
Download
Read More
Feature story
24 March 2014
Mass drug administration (MDA) in the United Republic of Tanzania
Multimedia
Infographic
Schistosomiasis (bilharzia): an acute and chronic neglected tropical disease
8 February 2017
Schistosomiasis (Bilharzia) – an overview
Schistosomiasis 2011 – Podcast
The World Health Organization (WHO) says limited availability of praziquantel, the recommended medicine to treat schistosomiasis is seriously hampering global efforts to control the disease.
00:05:15
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for
schistosomiasis
and
urogenital schistosomiasis
and
genital schistosomiasis or Bilharzia
Partners
The Schistosomiasis Consortium for Operational Research and Evaluation  (SCORE)
Schistosomiasis Control Initiative (SCI)
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC)
Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute (Swiss TPH)
Natural History Museum of London
Ivo de Carneri Foundation
London Centre for Neglected Tropical Disease Research
Hunan Institute of Parasitic Diseases, China
Case Western Reserve University, Center for Global Health and Diseases, USA
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr. Amadou Garba Djirmay
Scientist
garbadjirmaya@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Soil-transmitted helminthiases