Diabetes
Skip to main content
Overview
Diabetes is a chronic, metabolic disease characterized by elevated levels of blood glucose (or blood sugar), which leads over time to serious damage to the heart, blood vessels, eyes, kidneys and nerves. The most common is type 2 diabetes, usually in adults, which occurs when the body becomes resistant to insulin or doesn't make enough insulin. In the past 3 decades the prevalence of type 2 diabetes has risen dramatically in countries of all income levels. Type 1 diabetes, once known as juvenile diabetes or insulin-dependent diabetes, is a chronic condition in which the pancreas produces little or no insulin by itself. For people living with diabetes, access to affordable treatment, including insulin, is critical to their survival. There is a globally agreed target to halt the rise in diabetes and obesity by 2025.
About 830 million people worldwide have diabetes, the majority living in low-and middle-income countries. More than half of people living with diabetes are not receiving treatment. Both the number of people with diabetes and the number of people with untreated diabetes have been steadily increasing over the past decades.
Symptoms test
Symptoms of type 1 diabetes include the need to urinate often, thirst, constant hunger, weight loss, vision changes and fatigue. These symptoms may occur suddenly. Symptoms for type 2 diabetes are generally similar to those of type 1 diabetes but are often less marked. As a result, the disease may be diagnosed several years after onset, after complications have already arisen. For this reason, it is important to be aware of risk factors.
Prevention and treatment test
Type 1 diabetes cannot currently be prevented. Effective approaches are available to prevent type 2 diabetes and to prevent the complications and premature death that can result from all types of diabetes. These include policies and practices across whole populations and within specific settings (school, home, workplace) that contribute to good health for everyone, regardless of whether they have diabetes, such as exercising regularly, eating healthily, avoiding smoking, and controlling blood pressure and lipids.
The starting point for living well with diabetes is an early diagnosis – the longer a person lives with undiagnosed and untreated diabetes, the worse their health outcomes are likely to be. Easy access to basic diagnostics, such as blood glucose testing, should therefore be available in primary health care settings. Patients will need periodic specialist assessment or treatment for complications.
A series of cost-effective interventions can improve patient outcomes, regardless of what type of diabetes they may have. These interventions include blood glucose control through a combination of diet, physical activity and, if necessary, medication; control of blood pressure and lipids to reduce cardiovascular risk and other complications; and regular screening for damage to the eyes, kidneys and feet to facilitate early treatment.
Fact sheets
Diabetes
Initiatives and groups
The WHO Global Diabetes Compact
WHO Technical Advisory Group on Diabetes (TAG-D)
Resolutions and decisions
Reducing the burden of noncommunicable diseases
through strengthening prevention and control of
diabetes (WHA74.4)
Prevention and control of diabetes mellitus (WHA42/R36)
Technical work
Noncommunicable diseases, rehabilitation and disability
News
All →
14 November 2025
News release
WHO launches global guidelines on diabetes during pregnancy on World Diabetes Day
12 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO released updated guideline on HIV service delivery
5 September 2025
News release
WHO updates list of essential medicines to include key cancer, diabetes treatments
28 April 2025
Departmental update
Meeting of the Guideline Development Group for the monitoring and management of hyperglycaemia in pregnancy
Latest publications
All 	→
14 November 2025
WHO recommendations on care for women with diabetes during pregnancy
WHO maternal and perinatal health guidelines are relevant to those providing care and support during pregnancy, labour, childbirth and postnatal periods,...
Download
Read More
20 October 2025
Report of the eighth meeting of the WHO Technical Advisory Group on Diabetes: meeting report, 16-17 June...
The WHO Technical Advisory Group on Diabetes (TAG-D), established in August 2021, will provide technical advice to WHO on matters relating to WHO’s...
Download
Read More
23 September 2025
Availability, price and affordability of health technologies for the management of diabetes
The WHO list of priority medical devices for management of cardiovascular diseases and diabetes, https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/341967, describes those...
Download
Read More
1 September 2025
WHO guideline on HIV service delivery
This WHO guideline recommends integrating services for hypertension, diabetes, and mental health (including depression, anxiety, and substance use) into...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
14 November 2023
Breaking the silence on World Diabetes Day, hearing from people living with diabetes
13 November 2023
Increasing access to assistive technology and rehabilitation for people living with diabetes
Fact file
10 November 2021
Diabetes
Photo story
16 May 2019
The many faces of diabetes
Videos
All →
20 October 2023
Global Diabetes Summit – Segment 2
20 October 2023
Global Diabetes Summit
2 September 2022
Nothing For Us, Without Us: Ali’s Lived Experience in Lebanon
13 April 2021
The WHO Global Diabetes Compact: an opportunity for lasting change
Events
All →
World Diabetes Day
14 November 2025
World Diabetes Day 2025: Diabetes across life stages
14 November 2024
World Diabetes Day 2024: Breaking barriers, bridging gaps
13 November 2024 14:00 – 15:00 CET
WHO and International Diabetes Federation World Diabetes Day joint webinar: Breaking barriers and bridging gaps
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Cardiovascular diseases
Diseases and conditions
Eye care, vision impairment and blindness
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Human behaviour
Physical activity