Echinococcosis
Skip to main content
Overview
Echinococcosis is a parasitic disease that occurs in two main forms in humans: cystic echinococcosis (also known as hydatidosis) and alveolar echinococcosis, caused by the tapeworms
Echinococcus granulosus
and
Echinococcus multilocularis
, respectively.
Dogs, foxes and other carnivores harbour the adult worms in their intestine and evacuate the parasite eggs in their faeces. If the eggs are ingested by humans, they develop into larvae in several organs, mainly the liver and lungs.
Both cystic and alveolar echinococcosis are characterized by asymptomatic incubation periods that can last many years until the parasite larvae evolve and trigger clinical signs.
Both diseases can cause serious morbidity and death.
Symptoms
Cystic echinococcosis is characterized
by an asymptomatic incubation period that can last many years until the
parasite cysts evolve and trigger clinical signs, depending on the location and
size of the cysts and the pressure exerted on the surrounding tissues. In cystic
echinococcosis, the larval stages of the parasite develop as one or more cysts
mainly in the liver and lungs, and less frequently in the bones, kidneys,
spleen, muscles, central nervous system and eyes. Abdominal pain, nausea and
vomiting commonly occur when cysts invade the liver. If the lung is affected,
clinical signs include chronic cough, chest pain and shortness of breath.
Alveolar echinococcosis is
characterized by an asymptomatic incubation period of 5–15 years and the slow
development of a primary tumour-like lesion which is usually located in the
liver. Lesions may also involve other organs such as the spleen, lungs and
brain following dissemination of the parasite via the blood and lymphatic
system. Clinical signs include weight loss, abdominal pain, general malaise and
signs of hepatic failure. If left untreated, alveolar echinococcosis is
progressive and fatal.
Treatment
Both cystic echinococcosis and alveolar echinococcosis can be expensive and complicated to treat, sometimes requiring extensive surgery and/or prolonged drug therapy. The treatment used should be decided based on results from ultrasound images of the cyst. Treatments can include percutaneous treatment of the hydatid cysts with the PAIR (Puncture, Aspiration, Injection, Re-aspiration) technique, surgery, anti-infective drug treatments or simply watching and waiting.
Human cystic echinococcosis is diagnosed with imaging tools such as ultrasound or computed tomography, and its laboratory confirmation relies on serological tests.
Diagnosis of alveolar echinococcosis is based on clinical findings and epidemiological data, imaging techniques, histopathology and/or nucleic acid detection, and serology. Early diagnosis and radical (tumour-like) surgery followed by anti-infective prophylaxis remain the key elements. If the lesion is confined, radical surgery offers cure. Unfortunately, in many patients the disease is diagnosed at an advanced stage, and palliative surgery, if carried out without or with incomplete anti-parasitic treatment, frequently results in relapses.
Fact sheets
Echinococcosis
Questions and answers
Echinococcosis
Databases and tools
Global distribution of alveolar and cystic echinococcosis (2011)
Forms to request donated medicines and report data on echinococcosis
Technical work
Neglected Tropical Diseases
News
All →
23 June 2022
Departmental update
Neglected tropical diseases: GSK reaffirms longstanding commitment and expands its donation programme to three diseases
1 June 2020
Departmental update
Update on progress on Cystic echinococcosis  control in Mongolia
4 April 2020
Departmental update
Study shows the importance of high-resolution data in exploring within-country echinococcosis variations – Kyrgyzstan
23 April 2019
Departmental update
Increasing the adoption of animal vaccines to address livestock losses and boost control of neglected zoonotic diseases
Our work
Strengthening echinococcosis prevention and control
Improving surveillance data on cystic echinococcosis
Working with veterinary and food safety authorities to support the development of echinococcosis control programmes
Building capacity to enhance early diagnosis and clinical management of cystic echinococcosis
External publications
Unveiling the incidences and trends of alveolar echinococcosis in Europe: a systematic review from the KNOW-PATH project
24 June 2025 | Human alveolar echinococcosis is a notifiable parasitic infectious disease in most European countries; however, in practice, it is under-reported by national health systems. To fill this knowledge gap, data on the number, incidence, and trend of cases in Europe were extracted through a systematic review approach from both the scientific and grey literature, covering 1997–2023
Read more
Publications
All →
16 June 2025
WHO guidelines for the treatment of patients with cystic echinococcosis
The purpose of these guidelines is to provide guidance on the choice of treatment so that patients (adults and children) with CE cysts can be offered and...
Download
Read More
5 July 2022
The Road to 2030
In January 2021, the World Health Organization (WHO) published a new road map to address the burden of disease and death imposed by neglected tropical...
Download
Read More
Calls
12 November 2025
Call for consultation
Call for public consultation  ̶  Target Product Profiles for cystic echinococcosis
7 March 2022
Call for consultation
Call for public consultation  ̶  for experts to join the Guideline Development Group (GDG) on treatment of patients with cystic echinococcosis (CE)
feature stories
19 October 2023
Harnessing ultrasound capacity for early detection and management of cystic and alveolar echinococcosis
21 June 2022
Tackling dog-related zoonoses in the Islamic Republic of Iran:
momentum grows to prevent and control cystic echinococcosis
Multimedias
Infographic
Alveolar and cystic echinococcosis - 2 diseases
Animated life-cycle
WHO / Anne Marie Labouche
©
Credits
More information
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for
echinococcosis
More information
WHO Collaborating Centres for echinococcosis
Foodborne Disease Burden Epidemiology Reference Group (FERG)
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr Bernadette Abela-Ridder
Technical officer
abelab@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Snakebite envenoming
Diseases and conditions
Rabies
Diseases and conditions
Foodborne trematode infections
Diseases and conditions
Taeniasis and cysticercosis