Poliomyelitis
Skip to main content
©WHO
A member of volunteer vaccination team provides double doses of the oral polio vaccine to a 7 months-old Abdihakim Osman during the national immunization campaign in Hargeisa, Somaliland on 27 March 2019.
©
Credits
Poliomyelitis
2 April 2025
Key facts
Polio (poliomyelitis) mainly affects children under 5 years of age.
One in 200 infections leads to irreversible
paralysis. Among those paralysed, 5–10% die when their breathing muscles
become immobilized.
Cases due to wild poliovirus have decreased by
over 99% since 1988, from an estimated 350 000 cases in more than 125
endemic countries, to two endemic countries.
As long as a single child remains infected,
children in all countries are at risk of contracting polio. Failure to
eradicate polio from these last remaining strongholds could result in a
global resurgence of the disease.
In most countries, the global effort has
expanded capacities to tackle other infectious diseases by building
effective surveillance and immunization systems.
Overview
In 1988, the World Health Assembly adopted a resolution for the worldwide eradication of polio, marking the launch of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), a unique global public-private partnership. Since then, the incidence of polio worldwide has been reduced by 99%, and the world stands on the threshold of eradicating a human disease globally for only the second time in history, after smallpox in 1980.
Wild poliovirus cases have decreased by over 99% since 1988, from an estimated 350 000 cases in more than 125 endemic countries then, to two endemic countries).
Symptoms and risk
Polio is a highly infectious disease caused by a virus. It invades the nervous system and can cause total paralysis in a matter of hours. The virus is transmitted by person-to-person spread mainly through the faecal-oral route or, less frequently, by a common vehicle (for example, contaminated water or food) and multiplies in the intestine. Initial symptoms are fever, fatigue, headache, vomiting, stiffness of the neck and pain in the limbs. One in 200 infections leads to irreversible paralysis (usually in the legs). Among those paralysed, 5–10% die when their breathing muscles become immobilized.
Polio mainly affects children under 5 years of age. However, anyone of any age who is unvaccinated can contract the disease.
There is no cure for polio, it can only be prevented. Polio vaccine, given multiple times, can protect a child for life. There are two vaccines available:
oral polio vaccine and inactivated polio vaccine
. Both are effective and safe, and both are used in different combinations worldwide, depending on local epidemiological and programmatic circumstances, to ensure the best possible protection to populations can be provided.
Eradication
The strategies for polio eradication work when they are fully implemented. This is clearly demonstrated by the successful eradication of the disease in most countries of the world.
The
Polio Eradication Strategy
lays out the roadmap to securing a lasting and sustained world, free of all polioviruses, and
transition and polio post-certification
efforts are ongoing to assure that the infrastructure built up to eradicate polio will continue to benefit broader public health efforts, long after the disease is gone.
Key to success is ensuring the Strategy is fully implemented in all areas and is fully resourced. Failure to implement strategic approaches, however, leads to ongoing transmission of the virus. Endemic transmission of wild poliovirus is continuing in areas of Afghanistan and Pakistan. Failure to stop polio in these last remaining areas could result in global resurgence of the disease. That is why it is critical to ensure polio is eradicated completely, once and for all.
Once polio is eradicated, the world can celebrate the delivery of a major global public good that will benefit all people equally, no matter where they live. Economic modelling has found that the eradication of polio would save at least US$ 40–50 billion, mostly in low-income countries. Most importantly, success will mean that no child will ever again suffer the terrible effects of lifelong polio-paralysis.
The global effort to eradicate polio has been declared a Public Health Initiative of International Concern, under the International Health Regulations, and temporary recommendations by an Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations have been issued to countries affected by poliovirus transmission or are at high risk of re-emergence of the disease.
The polio effort continues to support broader public health efforts, including helping respond to natural disasters, humanitarian emergencies, droughts, earthquakes, outbreaks of other infectious diseases and supporting disease surveillance for broader public health initiatives.
WHO response
WHO, together with its GPEI partners, continues to support countries which remain affected by poliovirus or are at high risk of polio re-emergence in implementing eradication strategies, focusing in the first instance on immunization and disease surveillance. Since the GPEI was launched, the number of cases has fallen by over 99%.
In 1994, the WHO Region of the Americas was certified polio-free, followed by the WHO Western Pacific Region in 2000 and the WHO European Region in June 2002. On 27 March 2014, the WHO South-East Asia Region was certified polio-free, meaning that transmission of wild poliovirus has been interrupted in this bloc of 11 countries stretching from Indonesia to India. In 2020, Africa became the fifth region to be certified wild poliovirus-free.
More than 20 million people are able to walk today who would otherwise have been paralysed. An estimated 1.5 million childhood deaths have been prevented through the systematic administration of vitamin A during polio immunization activities.
For further information
Visit
www.polioeradication.org
Related
Polio Eradication Initiative
More about polio
News
Statement of the Forty-third meeting of the Polio IHR Emergency Committee
11 November 2025
Statement of the Forty-second meeting of the Polio IHR Emergency Committee
28 July 2025
Global childhood vaccination coverage holds steady, yet over 14 million infants remain unvaccinated – WHO, UNICEF
15 July 2025
Feature stories
Transition for Sustaining a Polio-Free World
3 September 2025
Donors making a difference: United against mpox, swift and effective response in action
25 September 2024
Donors making a difference: CERF helps WHO deliver on its pledge for one billion more people better protected from health emergencies
6 May 2024
Commentaries
Children in Gaza are now at risk of polio as well as bombs – we need a ceasefire now
1 August 2024
More
Videos
The Polio Surveillance System
Responding to a Polio Outbreak
Polio Eradication - Reaching Every Last Child
Vaccine-derived polioviruses