Health promotion
Skip to main content
Overview
“Health promotion is the process of enabling people to increase control over, and to improve their health.” Health Promotion Glossary, 1998
A brief history of Health Promotion
The first International Conference on Health Promotion was held in Ottawa in 1986, and was primarily a response to growing expectations for a new public health movement around the world. It launched a series of actions among international organizations, national governments and local communities to achieve the goal of "Health For All" by the year 2000 and beyond. The basic strategies for health promotion identified in the Ottawa Charter were: advocate (to boost the factors which encourage health), enable (allowing all people to achieve health equity) and mediate (through collaboration across all sectors).
Since then, the WHO Global Health Promotion Conferences have established and developed the global principles and action areas for health promotion. Most recently, the 9th global conference (Shanghai 2016), titled ‘Promoting health in the Sustainable Development Goals: Health for all and all for health’, highlighted the critical links between promoting health and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Whilst calling for bold political interventions to accelerate country action on the SDGs, the Shanghai Declaration provides a framework through which governments can utilize the transformational potential of health promotion.
Strategy
Promoting Healthier Populations
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) provides a bold and ambitious agenda for the future. WHO is committed to helping the world meet the SDGs by championing health across all the goals. WHO’s core mission is to promote health, alongside keeping the world safe and serving the vulnerable. Beyond fighting disease, we will work to ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages, leaving no-one behind.
Our target is 1 billion more people enjoying better health and well-being by 2023.
Focus
Good Governance
Strengthen governance and policies to make healthy choices accessible and affordable to all, and create sustainable systems that make whole-of-society collaboration real. This approach is based on the rationale that health is determined by multiple factors outside the direct control of the health sector (e.g. education, income, and individual living conditions) and that decisions made in other sectors can affect the health of individuals and shape patterns of disease distribution and mortality.
Health Literacy
Improving health literacy in populations provides the foundation on which citizens are enabled to play an active role in improving their own health, engage successfully with community action for health, and push governments to meet their responsibilities in addressing health and health equity.
Healthy Settings
The settings approach has roots in the WHO Health for All strategy and, more specifically, the Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion. Healthy Settings key principles include community participation, partnership, empowerment and equity. The Healthy Cities programme is the best-known example of a successful Healthy Settings programme.
Social mobilization
Bringing together all societal and personal influences to raise awareness of and demand for health care, assist in the delivery of resources and services, and cultivate sustainable individual and community involvement.
Fact sheets
Health literacy
Questions and answers
What is health promotion?
Initiatives and groups
Initiative on urban governance for health and well-being
Resolutions and decisions
Achieving well-being: a draft global framework for integrating well-being into public health utilizing a health promotion approach (WHA 76/A76/7 Add.2)
Well-being and health promotion (WHA75.19)
Contributing to social and economic development: sustainable action across sectors to improve health and health equity (WHA 67)
Reducing health inequities through action on the social determinants of health (WHA 62.14)
Contributing to social and economic development: sustainable action across sectors to improve health and health equity (follow-up of the 8th Global Conference on Health Promotion) (EB134)
Technical work
Health Promotion
News
All →
8 August 2025
Departmental update
WHO calls for parliamentary leadership on health at the Sixth World Conference of Speakers of Parliament
10 June 2025
Departmental update
WHO launches new Collaborating Centre on Alcohol Policy and Public Health Research
10 April 2025
Departmental update
Worldwide rally for maternal and newborn health marks World Health Day 2025
7 June 2024
Departmental update
WHO and Italian National Institute of Health sign memorandum of understanding to improve care for healthy ageing
Latest publications
All →
17 November 2025
WHO Initiative on Urban Governance for Health and Well-being
This
document presents an overview of the WHO Initiative on Urban Governance for Health and Well-being, outlining its strategic objectives, key results...
Download
Read More
17 November 2025
WHO Initiative on Urban Governance for Health and Well-being
City Spotlight on Bogota, Colombia, summarizing progress from Phase 1 (2020–2024) of the WHO Initiative on Urban Governance for Health and Well-being...
Download
Read More
27 September 2025
Integrative review of national health literacy policy blueprints as a tool for change toward health literate...
Health literacy enables people to access, understand, and use information and services to make informed health decisions, improving health and quality...
Download
Read More
25 July 2025
Implementing the global framework on well-being at the country level
As
part of implementing Resolution WHA75.19, and building on the    WHO Global framework on well-being adopted by
Member States at the Seventy-sixth...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Creating healthy cities
Improving health literacy
Promoting health through good governance
Promoting well-being
Events
All →
Launch webinar: Laws and regulations addressing acceptability, availability and affordability of alcoholic beverages
19 June 2025
Webinar: Integrated care for older people handbook (ICOPE handbook)
Guidance for person-centred assessment and pathways in primary care, Second edition
29 January 2025 13:00 – 14:15 UTC Time
World Health Summit 2024
13 – 15 October 2024
Webinar series: Regulating digital marketing of tobacco, alcohol, food and non-alcoholic beverages and breast-milk substitutes
7 – 21 June 2024
Feature stories
All →
26 September 2025
Empowering community leadership: how Bogota’s Kennedy locality is strengthening health governance through disability inclusion
26 September 2025
Fighting dengue together: how community engagement is transforming health in Khulna City, Bangladesh
26 September 2025
The transformative power of community action: improving access to safe drinking water in Douala, Cameroon
23 May 2025
Six public health champions celebrated at the Seventy-eighth World Health Assembly
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Poster: WHO75 Health For All
Infographic
Health is everywhere
Infographic
WHO Manifesto: Build healthy, liveable cities
Infographic
WHO Manifesto: Ensure Access to Clean Water
Videos
All →
18 June 2025
Alcoholic beverages: Laws & regulations about their acceptability, availability and affordability
25 February 2024
Healthy Cities: Urban governance for health and well-being, examples from Swiss cities
25 February 2024
Healthy Cities: Urban governance for health and well-being, examples from Swiss cities (SHORT)
1 October 2023
Alcohol consumption webinar: Warnings at the World Trade Organization"
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Adolescent health
Populations and demographics
Child health
Human behaviour
Nutrition
Substances
Tobacco
Populations and demographics
Ageing
Behavioural interventions
Health promoting schools
Human behaviour
Physical activity