Blood transfusion safety
Skip to main content
Overview
Nearly 120 million units of blood are donated every year. However, this is not sufficient to meet the global need many patients requiring a transfusion do not have timely access to safe blood. Blood cannot be stored indefinitely, meaning there is a constant need for donations. Regular donations are required to ensure there is always a supply for those in need. Despite global need, donation rates differ around the world and some high-income countries see up to seven times more donations than low-income countries.
Blood transfusions are needed for a wide range of health conditions including anaemia, complications during pregnancy and childbirth, severe trauma due to accidents, and surgical procedures. They are also regularly used for patients with conditions such as sickle cell disease and thalassaemia and for products to treat haemophilia.
Maintaining safe and effective procedures around the collection, storage and use of donated blood is essential. Collectively called haemovigilance, these procedures cover the entire blood transfusion chain and are used to standardize the use of blood in healthcare.
Collection and use
Donated blood is used in many ways beyond whole blood transfusions. Processing can convert it into plasma, red cell concentrates, platelet concentrates and more, with each used for specific cases in health-care delivery. In some cases, this allows a unit of donated blood to meet the needs of more than one patient and is an important aspect of the transfusion train. However, not all countries have facilities to process blood in this way, and only 50 of 173 reporting countries produce plasma-derived medicinal products domestically.
The world’s blood supply comes through over 12 000 blood centres and is donated by three types of people: unpaid volunteers, family members of patients and paid donors. WHO advocates the development of national blood systems based on unpaid volunteers because that group tends to have fewer bloodborne infections. Despite this, many countries continue to receive less than half of blood donations from unpaid volunteers, with much of their blood supply dependent on family donations and paid donors.
Gaps
The unavailability of timely, safe blood transfusions has led to many otherwise avoidable deaths. A consistent supply of blood is a cornerstone of any health-care system, but this relies on regular donations and effective health-care infrastructure.
Huge gaps exist between low-, middle- and high-income countries regarding blood donation. Of the nearly 120 million units of blood donated each year around the world, 42% are in high-income countries, where just 16% of the global population lives. However, more young people donate in low- and middle-income countries than in high-income countries.
Compounding insufficient collection rates is the inability of many health-care systems to adequately screen donated blood for diseases such as HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C and syphilis according to quality system requirements. The inability to test blood can be due in part to the irregular supply of testing kits, particularly in low-income areas. Inadequate testing contributes to the spread of transfusion-transmissible infections, which can compromise the patient’s wellbeing and further strain health-care systems.
Fact sheets
Blood safety and availability
Patient safety
Questions and answers
Why should I donate blood?
Databases and tools
Global database on blood safety
Resolutions and decisions
WHA63.12 Availability, safety and quality of blood products
WHA28.72 Utilization and supply of human blood and blood products
Technical work
Health products policy and standards
Integrated Health Services
News
All →
26 February 2020
Departmental update
WHO steps up action to improve access to safe blood
19 February 2020
Departmental update
WHO Action framework to advance universal access to safe, effective and quality assured blood products 2020 - 2023
26 September 2019
Departmental update
WHO Action Framework to Advance Universal Access to Quality and Safe Blood and Blood Components for Transfusion and Plasma Derived Medicinal Products
15 May 2018
News release
First-ever WHO list of essential diagnostic tests to improve diagnosis and treatment outcomes
Publications
All →
30 June 2025
Access to safe, effective and quality-assured health products and technologies
The roadmap for WHO action 2025–2030 outlines to Member States, and other stakeholders WHO’s unique role and approach for increasing access...
Download
Read More
23 April 2025
Guidance on implementing patient blood management to improve global blood health status
Incorporating expertise from peers working in countries where health care faces extreme resource constraints, attention  is paid to how PBM processes...
Download
Read More
20 January 2025
Implementing cross-border transfer of domestic plasma to obtain plasma-derived medicinal products: policy...
The document provides recommendations on legal, regulatory and policy conditions for assuring the quality of plasma for fractionation and protecting the...
Download
Read More
1 February 2024
Guidance on implementation of a quality system in blood establishments
This document provides guidance on the activities needed to implement a functioning quality system in the BE, withinformation on the technical resources...
Download
Read More
Events
All →
2025
World Blood Donor Day 2025: Give blood, give hope: together we save lives
14 June 2025
2024
World Blood Donor Day 2024: Celebrating 20 years of giving: thank you, blood donors!
14 June 2024
Feature stories
All →
7 June 2021
Blood donor story: Cabo Verde
7 June 2021
Blood donor stories: China
Multimedia
All →
13 June 2025
World Blood Donor Day 2025
14 June 2024
Donating blood saves lives! World Blood Donor Day 2024
8 July 2023
Donate blood – help save lives
14 June 2023
World Blood Donor Day 2023: DG message
Related health topics
Physiological interventions
Blood products
Communicable diseases
Hepatitis
Communicable diseases
HIV
Health systems
Infection prevention and control
Health systems
Patient safety
Health interventions
Transplantation
Facts in pictures
8 June 2022
Blood transfusion