Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever
Skip to main content
Overview
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a viral haemorrhagic fever usually transmitted by ticks. It can also be contracted through contact with viraemic animal tissues (animal tissue where the virus has entered the bloodstream) during and immediately post-slaughter
of animals. CCHF outbreaks constitute a threat to public health services as the virus can lead to epidemics, has a high case fatality ratio (10–40%), potentially results in hospital and health facility outbreaks, and is difficult to prevent and treat.
CCHF is endemic in all of Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East and in Asia.
The disease was first described in the Crimean Peninsula in 1944 and given the name Crimean haemorrhagic fever. In 1969 it was recognized that the pathogen causing Crimean haemorrhagic fever was the same as that responsible for an illness identified in 1956 in the
Congo Basin. The linkage of the two place names resulted in the current name for the disease and the virus.
Symptoms
Following infection by a tick bite, the incubation period of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is usually 1–3 days, with a maximum of 9 days. Following contact with infected blood or tissues, the incubation period is usually 5–6 days, with a maximum of 13 days.
Onset of symptoms is sudden and can include fever, muscle ache, dizziness, neck pain, backache, headache, sore eyes and photophobia (sensitivity to light). There may be nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,
abdominal pain and sore throat early on, followed by sharp mood swings and confusion. After 2–4 days the agitation may be replaced by sleepiness, depression and lassitude, and the abdominal pain may localize to the upper right quadrant, with
detectable hepatomegaly (liver enlargement).
Other clinical signs include tachycardia (fast heart rate), lymphadenopathy (enlarged lymph nodes), and a petechial rash (a rash caused by bleeding into the skin) on internal mucosal surfaces, such as in the mouth and throat, and
on the skin. The petechiae may give way to larger rashes called ecchymoses, and other haemorrhagic phenomena. There is usually evidence of hepatitis, and severely ill patients may experience rapid kidney deterioration, sudden liver failure or pulmonary
failure after the fifth day of illness.
Treatment
Early intensive supportive care including fluid management and treatment of specific symptoms, can improve survival chance. There is currently no specific treatment approved for Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever.
The mortality rate from CCHF is approximately 30%, with death occurring in the second week of illness. In patients who recover, improvement generally begins on the ninth or tenth day after the onset of illness.
It is difficult to prevent or control CCHF infection in animals and ticks as the tick-animal-tick cycle usually goes unnoticed and the infection in domestic animals is usually not apparent. Furthermore, the tick vectors are numerous and widespread, so
tick control with acaricides (chemicals intended to kill ticks) is only a realistic option for well-managed livestock production facilities.
There are no vaccines widely available for human or animal use. In the absence of a vaccine, the only way to reduce infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating people about the measures they can take to reduce exposure
to the virus.
Fact sheets
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever
Databases and tools
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever outbreak toolbox
Disease outbreak news
Latest Disease Outbreak News
Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever - Iraq
Weekly epidemiological record (WER)
Training
Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever: Introduction
Technical work
Disease outbreaks
News
All →
19 March 2025
Departmental update
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever in Iraq: a risk communication and community engagement success story
Publications
All→
17 May 2024
Infection prevention and control and water, sanitation and hygiene measures for Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic...
This operational guide addresses important
infection prevention and control (IPC) measures that should be implemented
during a Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic...
Download
Read More
27 December 2019
Introduction to Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever
Download
Read More
27 December 2019
WHO outbreak communication planning guide
The objective of this document is to help national authorities apply the WHO outbreak communication principles to their outbreak planning and preparation...
Download
Read More
9 December 2015
Summary report on the meeting on prevention and control of Crimean–Congo haemorrhagic fever in the Eastern...
World Health Organization, Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean. (‎2016)‎. Summary report on the meeting on prevention and control...
Download
Read More
Our work
WHO Foresight: Monitoring emerging technologies and building futures-thinking
Prioritizing diseases for research and development in emergency contexts
Streamlining operational R&D response during outbreaks
Developing norms and standards in the epidemic context
Accelerating R&D processes
Accelerating impact of innovations for health
Conducting research and building capacity of researchers
Multimedia
All→
Infographic
Geographic distribution of Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever
Infographic
How to safely collect blood samples by phlebotomy from patients suspected to be infected with Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus?
Infographic
How to safely ship human blood samples from Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) cases within a country by road, rail and sea?
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Ebola virus disease
Communicable diseases
Lassa fever
Communicable diseases
Nipah virus infection
Communicable diseases
Rift Valley fever