Chronic respiratory diseases
Skip to main content
Overview
Chronic respiratory diseases (CRDs) affect the airways and other structures of the lungs. Some of the most common are chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, occupational lung diseases and pulmonary hypertension. In addition to tobacco smoke, other risk factors include air pollution, occupational chemicals and dusts, and frequent lower respiratory infections during childhood. CRDs are not curable; however, various forms of treatment that help open the air passages and improve shortness of breath can help control symptoms and improve daily  life for people living with these conditions. The WHO Global Alliance against CRDs (GARD) vision is “a world in which all people breathe freely”. GARD focuses on the needs of people with CRDs in low- and middle-income countries.
The aim of the WHO Chronic Respiratory Diseases Programme is to support Member States in their efforts to reduce the toll of morbidity, disability and premature mortality related to chronic respiratory diseases, specifically asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Symptoms
The two most common chronic respiratory diseases are asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). These both affect the airways in the
lungs.
Asthma is characterized by recurrent attacks of breathlessness and wheezing
due to airway narrowing, which vary in severity and frequency from person to
person. Symptoms may occur several times in a day or week in affected
individuals, and for some people become worse during physical activity or at
night. Asthma is the most common chronic disease among children.
In asthma, the airway obstruction is reversible with inhaled medicines, but
in COPD it is mostly fixed. COPD only affects adults and usually becomes worse
with time. The most common symptoms of COPD are breathlessness or a need for
air, sputum production and a chronic cough.
Risk factors for chronic respiratory diseases include tobacco smoking
(including second-hand smoke), air pollution, allergens and occupational risks.
Outdoor air pollution and indoor air pollution (often caused by cooking with
solid fuels) are also common causes.
Asthma and COPD may be prevented by reducing or avoiding exposure to these
risk factors.
Treatments
Neither asthma nor chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can be cured
but treatment can reduce symptoms, prevent deterioration and improve daily life.
During attacks of breathlessness caused by airway narrowing, inhaled
medicines (bronchodilators) can open the airways and relieve symptoms. If
untreated, severe attacks can lead to death.
Appropriate management of asthma with inhaled corticosteroid medicine can
control the progression of the disease and reduce deaths. Long-term treatment
is required for people with persistent symptoms and exposures which trigger
symptoms (e.g. smoke, fumes, dust, grass and tree pollen, animal fur and
feathers) should be avoided.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is confirmed by a spirometry test,
which measures how much and how quickly a person can blow air out of their
lungs. Symptoms can be treated through medical and physical treatments;
however, with COPD in people who smoke tobacco, the most effective treatment
available is to stop smoking. This can slow down the progression of the disease
and decrease COPD-related deaths. In specific cases, people may benefit from using
inhaled corticosteroid medicines.
Fact sheets
Asthma
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Ambient (outdoor) air pollution
Household air pollution
Questions and answers
What is pulmonary hypertension?
What is bronchiectasis?
What is obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome?
Initiatives and Groups
Global Alliance against Chronic Respiratory Diseases (GARD)
Resolutions and decisions
Preparation for the third High-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of NCDs (WHA71.2)
Prevention and control of NCDs: implementation of the global strategy (WHA61.14)
Respiratory diseases (WHA32.33)
Technical work
Noncommunicable diseases, rehabilitation and disability
News
All →
18 November 2025
Departmental update
Shining a spotlight on COPD - raising awareness through media workshops
6 May 2025
Departmental update
Working together to make asthma a global health priority
6 June 2024
News release
Mr José Luis Castro appointed as WHO Director-General Special Envoy
for Chronic Respiratory Diseases
7 May 2024
Departmental update
World Asthma Day: WHO calls for better education to empower people living with asthma
Our work
Management of noncommunicable diseases
Integrated management of NCDs
Publications
All →
13 October 2025
Global scientific panel on chronic respiratory diseases: background paper
This background paper was developed by the Global Alliance against Chronic Respiratory Diseases (GARD) to provide the scientific basis for strengthening...
Download
Read More
13 October 2025
Key advocacy messages for chronic respiratory diseases
This advocacy paper, developed by the Global Alliance against Chronic Respiratory Diseases (GARD), calls for urgent and coordinated action to reduce the...
Download
Read More
16 September 2025
Chronic respiratory diseases in WHO South-East Asia
Chronic respiratory diseases (CRDs) – primarily chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma – are a major and growing public health...
Download
Read More
6 January 2025
Report of the seventeenth annual meeting of the Global Alliance against Chronic Respiratory Diseases:...
The Global Alliance against Chronic Respiratory Diseases (GARD) is a voluntary alliance of national and international organizations, institutions and agencies...
Download
Read More
Related health topics
Physical environment
Air pollution
Physical environment
Occupational health
Substances
Tobacco