Commercial determinants of health - Global
Skip to main content
Overview
Commercial determinants of health (CDoH) are the private sector activities impacting public health, either positively or negatively, and the enabling political economic systems and norms.
CDoH includes all products and services provided by private entities to gain a financial profit, as well as market strategies, working conditions, production externalities and political activities, such as misinformation, lobbying and donations. Some parts of the private sector also use instrumental, structural and discursive power to undermine public health policies that threaten profits.
Commercial activities, especially by transnational corporations, affect non-communicable disease, infectious diseases and pandemics, injuries and climate change. These impacts also worsen inequities between and within countries. Profit shifting and the aggressive use of trade agreements by the unhealthy commodity industries are particularly detrimental to the global south.
Simultaneously, the private sector is an indispensable partner for development by, for example, creating vaccines, medicines and assistive products, financing, building infrastructure and delivering health services towards Universal Health Coverage, or by ensuring food security. Member States should work to leverage these opportunities while protecting populations from harm.
Communities, civil society organizations, governments at all levels, philanthropists and, where aligned, the private sector, must work together to achieve health for all. This requires addressing CDoH through conflict of interest, regulative, legal, economic, whole-of-government and geopolitical reforms.
Impact
The commercial determinants of health (CDoH) can negatively impact health, wellbeing, equity and health-systems. For example, half of all tobacco consumers will die from health issues related to these products, with annual deaths hitting 8 million. Many others are harmed by the actions of the alcohol, fast-food and sugar-sweetened beverage industries. Additionally, 20% of suicides are related to pesticide product self-poisoning. These especially affect disadvantaged population groups and low- and middle- income countries.
CDoH also have health promoting and protective effects. Nearly 2 billion people will need assistive devices by 2050, greatly improving wellbeing. Installing and mandating the use of safety devices such as seatbelts, child restraints or helmets significantly reduces serious and fatal injuries. Pharmaceuticals and vaccines have significant effects, with the measles vaccines alone preventing 25.5 million deaths since 2000.
There are also broader existential and societal impacts. Industry action drives climate change while also preventing meaningful action. Around 66% of all antimicrobials are used in agricultural practices, worsening antimicrobial resistance and creating further pandemic risks.
Other evidence has shown exposure to long working hours was the key occupational risk, attributable to approximately 750 000 out of 1.9 million work-related deaths in 2016. Finally, privatization, deregulation and tax avoidance can worsen public services and increase inequities.
Response
WHO urges Member States to address the commercial determinants of health (CDoH) to improve health and health equity, thereby leveraging the benefits while protecting populations from harm.
On a microlevel, this includes taxation, fiscal policies and meaningful government regulations on advertising, promotion and sponsorship of harmful products. Millions of lives have been saved thanks to the control policies under the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and MPOWER.
Member States should collaborate to address structural elements of CDoH, including the national and global political, economic, legal, financial and trade systems that enable and promote detrimental corporate practice. This broader agenda means repositioning social outcomes ahead of profit through alternative economic models and metrics, and reforming governance, including lobbying, donations and conflict of interest management.
The private sector can promote health and well-being. During the COVID-19 pandemic, several entertainment companies joined WHO in partnerships to prevent the spread of the virus.
Governments are also encouraged to ensure the equitable availability of those commercial products and services that promote or improve health and well-being.
Civil society organizations can lead this action, enhancing transparency, accountability and harnessing citizen power to set progressive agendas. This can motivate government regulation and directly on the private sector to eliminate the harmful and enhance favourable impacts of their activities.
Fact sheets
Commercial determinants of health
Databases and tools
Occupational Burden of Disease Application tool
Initiatives and groups
Food Systems for Health
COVID-19 technology access pool
MPOWER
Resolutions and decisions
WHA52.18 Towards a WHO framework convention on tobacco control
WHA63.27 Strengthening the capacity of governments to constructively engage the private sector in providing essential health-care services
WHA69.9 Ending inappropriate promotion of foods for infants and young children
Technical work
Social Determinants of Health
Economic and commercial determinants of health
News
All →
4 June 2025
Departmental update
WHA78: Key decisions advancing the global NCD and mental health agenda ahead of HLM4
21 May 2025
Departmental update
Technical paper on economic and commercial determinants of health in Small Island Developing States
5 March 2025
Departmental update
Advancing healthier populations goals with multi-country efforts to tackle industry interference
28 July 2023
Departmental update
Leadership Dialogue on Food Systems for People’s Nutrition and Health
Latest publications
All →
16 March 2025
Economic and commercial determinants of health in small island developing states: noncommunicable diseases,...
This Technical Paper is the first in a series of Technical Papers on economic and commercial determinants of health in Small Island Developing States (SIDS)....
Download
Read More
10 May 2022
Reducing the harm from alcohol – by regulating cross-border alcohol marketing, advertising and promotion:...
This comprehensive report details the full extent of the way that alcohol is being marketed across national borders – often by digital means –...
Download
Read More
28 April 2022
Scope and impact of digital marketing strategies for promoting breastmilk substitutes
Digital technologies are increasingly used for marketing food products throughout the world. Although the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk...
Download
Read More
27 April 2022
Eurohealth: commercial determinants of cancer control policy
This Eurohealth special issue seeks to understand the commercial determinants of cancer control policy. This relates to private-sector activities that...
Download
Read More
Our work
Strengthening national food control systems
Developing an urban health research agenda
Conducting strategic risk assessment for all hazards in countries
Feature stories
All →
12 April 2021
Countries share examples of how tobacco tax policies create win-wins for development, health and revenues
19 June 2020
Public and private sectors join forces to deliver lifesaving COVID-19 supplies in Yemen
10 July 2019
10 areas governments could work with to reduce the harmful use of alcohol
Multimedia
All →
24 January 2023
Commercial determinants of health: Data, digital spaces and misinformation - WHO's WEBINAR 3
18 August 2021
Healthier diets through marketing regulations of unhealthy options for children
Infographic
Globally, 62 countries have adopted comprehensive smoke-free policies
Events
All →
29 October 2024 14:00 – 15:30 CET
Partnership, Equity and Community: Civil Society Leadership for the Commercial Determinants of Health
16 April 2024 12:00 – 13:00 CET
Pornography, young people, and the commercial and social determinants of violence
23 January 2024 11:00 – 12:30 CET
Policy, Accountability and Trust: Governing the Commercial Determinants of Health
17 May 2023 15:00 – 16:30 CET
Commercial Determinants of Health: Sustainable development, pandemic recovery and realizing the Right to Health
Commentaries
7 March 2021
Waive Covid vaccine patents to put world on war footing
22 January 2019
Mental health in the workplace
20 December 2017
Seeing Through Big Tobacco’s Smokescreen
Related health topics
Human behaviour
Addictive behaviour
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Socio-political determinants
Social determinants of health
Health systems
Common goods for health
Conditions
Obesity
Substances
Tobacco