Podcasts
Skip to main content
Podcasts
WHO/A. Tardy
©
Credits
One of the ways that
WHO conveys information to our audiences around the world is through podcasts.
On this page you can find our various podcast
series on a range of health topics.
Science in 5
Science in 5 is WHO’s longest running video and audio series.
Originally created in late 2020 to explain the science related to COVID-19, it has since expanded to cover a much broader range of topics related to health.
#NoExcuse
There is no excuse for sexual misconduct in the humanitarian or development sectors. Shining a light on this dark and painful topic is an important step to addressing it. Changing how we view the issue is half the battle. It is with these points in mind that the #NoExcuse podcast was born.
EYE on Yellow fever
EYE on Yellow Fever is a ten-part podcast series that takes you inside a concerted global effort to ensure that yellow fever does not become the next big global health threat. The Eliminate Yellow Fever Epidemics (EYE) Strategy was launched in 2017 with the vision to stop all yellow fever epidemics by 2026.
Awake at night
A podcast with the UN’s communications chief, Melissa Fleming, features WHO staff.  The ‘Awake at Night’ podcast is an in-depth interview series focused on remarkable frontline United Nations staff members who have dedicated their lives to helping people in parts of the world where people have the hardest lives - war zones, refugee camps, slums and areas hit by pandemics, natural disasters and the devastation of climate change.
Global health matters
Hosted by Dr Garry Aslanyan with a variety of guests, the podcast discusses key questions, such as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on research, promoting gender equality and women in global health leadership, the pros and cons of open access to research, the role of implementation research and many other topics and issues. Through the podcast, we aim to discuss and share experiences and views on different aspects of global health research, with a focus on low- and middle-income country perspectives.