Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
Skip to main content
Overview
Onchocerciasis – or “river blindness” – is a parasitic disease caused by the filarial worm
Onchocerca volvulus
transmitted by repeated bites of infected blackflies (
Simulium
spp.). These blackflies breed along fast-flowing rivers and streams,
close to remote villages located near fertile land where people rely on
agriculture.
In the human body, the adult worms produce embryonic larvae
(microfilariae) that migrate to the skin, eyes and other organs. When a
female blackfly bites an infected person during a blood meal, it also
ingests microfilariae which develop further in the blackfly and are then
transmitted to the next human host during subsequent bites.
Symptoms
Onchocerciasis is an eye and skin disease. Symptoms are caused by
the microfilariae, which move around the human body in the subcutaneous
tissue and induce intense inflammatory responses when they die. Infected
people may show symptoms such as severe itching and various skin
changes. Some infected people develop eye lesions which can lead to
visual impairment and permanent blindness. In most cases, nodules under
the skin form around the adult worms.
Onchocerciasis occurs mainly in tropical areas. More than 99% of
infected people live in 31 countries in sub-Saharan Africa: Angola,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Republic of Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya,
Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Sudan, Togo, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania.
Onchocerciasis is also transmitted in Brazil, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Yemen.
Treatment
WHO recommends treating onchocerciasis with ivermectin at least once yearly for 10 to 15 years. Where
O. volvulus
co-exists with
Loa loa
, treatment strategies have to be adjusted.
Loa loa
is a parasitic filarial worm that is endemic in Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria
and South Sudan. Treatment of individuals with high levels of
L. loa
in the blood can sometimes result in severe adverse events. In affected
countries, it is recommended to follow the Mectizan Expert Committee
(MEC)/APOC recommendations for the management of severe adverse events.
Fact sheets
Onchocerciasis
Databases and tools
Global Health Observatory (GHO) – onchocerciasis
Preventive Chemotherapy Data Portal
Resolutions and decisions
Prevention of avoidable blindness and visual impairment, 2009
| WHA62.1
Prevention of avoidable blindness and visual impairment, 2006
| WHA59.25
Elimination of avoidable blindness, 2003
| WHA56.26
Onchocerciasis control through ivermectin distribution, 1994
| WHA47.32
Initiative
Global Onchocerciasis Network for Elimination (GONE)
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
WHO Academy Course
Onchocerciasis: training of health workers at national and district levels on skin-NTDs
News
All →
26 May 2025
Departmental update
Progress for NTDs: two resolutions adopted at WHA78
22 May 2025
Departmental update
African Nations unite to eliminate  visceral leishmaniasis and boost cross-border collaboration for NTDs
1 April 2025
Departmental update
Global meeting calls for stronger partnerships to tackle skin NTDs
Our work
Verifying the elimination of onchocerciasis
Building national programme capacity to implement WHO‐recommended strategies
Monitoring regional and country progress towards the elimination of onchocerciasis transmission
Providing evidence-based guidance to countries for onchocerciasis elimination
Promoting the integrated approach to skin-related neglected tropical diseases
Events
22 September 2025 12:00 – 13:30 UTC Time
Consultation on cross-border Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for neglected tropical disease elimination
Calls
3 October 2025
Call for consultation
Survey : WHA resolution on skin diseases as a global public health priority
Working Groups
WHO Skin NTDs Working Groups (office.com)
Following the Skin NTD Meeting held in Geneva, Switzerland from 27-31 March 2023, WHO is proposing to establish different INFORMAL WORKING GROUPS to help follow up of the main outcomes and keep the momentum.
Publications
All →
13 October 2025
National onchocerciasis elimination committees: a handbook for expert advisory groups...
National onchocerciasis elimination committees (NOECs) play a vital role in national neglected tropical disease (NTD) programmes. The purpose of this handbook...
Download
Read More
10 October 2025
Elimination of human onchocerciasis: progress report, 2024–2025
Onchocerciasis, or river blindness, remains a major public health challenge despite decades of sustained efforts. More than 99% of population requiring...
Download
Read More
10 October 2025
Progress in eliminating onchocerciasis in the WHO Region of the Americas: Report from the Inter-American...
Human onchocerciasis (river blindness) is caused by
the parasitic worm Onchocerca volvulus, transmitted
by Simulium black flies that breed in fast-flowing...
Download
Read More
Feature story
30 January 2025
A historic milestone! WHO verifies Niger free of onchocerciasis as the first country on the African continent
14 February 2019
Despite civil unrest, almost half a million Yemenis treated for onchocerciasis
Multimedia
All →
2 February 2023
GONE - the new Global onchocerciasis network for elimination
Infographic
Countries reporting cases on at least one skin-NTD, 2017-2021
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for
River Blindness
and
Onchocerciasis
Other diseases related to onchocerciasis
Nodding syndrome
Onchocerciasis in WHO regions
Region of the Americas
African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control (APOC)
Partners
Partners in the fight against onchocerciasis
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr. Dieudonné Sankara
Medical Officer
sankarad@who.int
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Buruli ulcer  (Mycobacterium ulcerans infection)
Diseases and conditions
Leprosy (Hansen disease)
Diseases and conditions
Yaws (Endemic treponematoses)
Diseases and conditions
Lymphatic filariasis (Elephantiasis)