Environmental health
Skip to main content
Overview
Good health depends on clean air, a stable climate, a preserved natural environment, as well as access to adequate water, sanitation and hygiene. It also requires protection from harmful radiation, unsafe chemical management and unhealthy working conditions. A healthy environment could prevent nearly a quarter of the global disease burden.
The ongoing environmental crisis is profoundly affecting health as climate change intensifies, biodiversity declines and pollution becomes ubiquitous. The health impacts of poor environmental conditions occur not only directly but also indirectly, through effects on food production, migration, economic instability and social inequalities.
Urgent action is needed to transform how we live, work, produce, consume and govern. Strengthening primary prevention is essential, given the substantial reduction in disease burden it can offer, as well as the potential savings in healthcare costs and resources. Cross-sectoral collaboration is crucial in addressing the environmental determinants of health, including the health, energy, industry, agriculture and transport sectors. Integrating actions across these sectors often leads to significant co-benefits and cost reductions.
Impact
In 2016, 13.7 million of deaths, representing 24% of global fatalities, were attributed to modifiable environmental risks. This means nearly one in four global deaths are linked to environmental conditions.
Almost all diseases are influenced by unhealthy environments, with noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) – including heart disease, chronic respiratory diseases and cancers – being the most affected. Air pollution alone is responsible for millions of these deaths each year. Infectious diseases are also significantly impacted, with pathogens transmitted through unsafe water, sanitation and hygiene, and zoonoses rising due to ecosystem disruption. Additionally, antimicrobial resistance poses a growing threat, especially when wastewater and solid waste are not properly managed.
Climate change is exacerbating health risks by increasing the frequency and severity of extreme weather events, including deadly heatwaves. The shifting distribution of climate-sensitive disease vectors is creating new patterns of infectious diseases. Climate change also affects food production and migration, further compounding health threats. Unsafe working conditions contribute to risks across all major disease categories.
However, effective solutions exist to prevent disease and mitigate the potential burden on health systems. These solutions could significantly reduce the associated costs, which are increasingly becoming a pressing issue in many countries.
WHO response
WHO’s efforts to advance the global agenda for creating healthier environments for healthier people include:
providing leadership on key transitions: We guide critical transitions, such as those in energy and transportation, which are essential for mitigating environmental health risks. We also work to stimulate good governance practices that integrate health and environmental considerations across relevant sectors;
promoting knowledge generation and dissemination: We facilitate the generation and sharing of evidence-based knowledge, establishing norms and guidelines that drive effective solutions. We steer research, monitor health risks, and assess the effectiveness of implemented solutions. This ongoing effort is crucial for identifying emerging threats and adapting strategies to mitigate their impact on public health;
supporting capacity building and scaling action: We assist countries in strengthening their ability to address environmental health challenges by building local capacity and supporting scalable mechanisms for action. By fostering collaboration across sectors, we help countries to implement healthy and sustainable policies and programs that reduce risks and promote healthier communities; and
building capacity for emergency preparedness and response: We work to strengthen emergency preparedness and response systems in case of environment-related incidents, such as natural disasters, pollution events, and outbreaks of diseases linked to environmental changes.
Fact sheets
Heat and health
Electronic waste (e-waste)
Questions and answers
Estimations of attributable burden of disease due to a risk factor
Databases and tools
Public health and environment
Monitoring health for the SDGs
Ambient air pollution
Household air pollution
Water, sanitation and health
Initiatives and groups
Initiative against extreme heat and health risks in workplaces and major events
Technical Advisory Group on Economics for Environment, Climate Change and Health (TAG-EconECH)
WHO–WMO Joint Climate and Health Programme initiative
Resolutions and decisions
Health environment and climate change (WHA72.15)
Technical work
Environment, Climate Change and Health
News
All →
14 November 2025
News release
WHO and Brazil urge swift action on Belém Health Action Plan at COP30
31 October 2025
News release
WHO calls for a new era of strategic urban health action with global guide to unlock healthy, prosperous and resilient societies
29 October 2025
News release
Climate inaction is claiming millions of lives every year, warns new Lancet Countdown report
17 October 2025
Departmental update
No safe level: act now to end lead exposure
Latest publications
All →
17 October 2025
WHO strategic approach on air quality, energy access and health
WHO, as the coordinating authority on international health, supports countries in protecting public health through evidence-based policies and actions....
Download
Read More
10 October 2025
Mapping climate change and health indicators
This review sheds light on how countries are measuring the health impacts of climate change. It examines the indicators countries are using in their vulnerability...
Download
Read More
2 October 2025
Land use planning: sectoral solutions for air pollution and health
Exposure to air pollution and its associated health impacts are affected by land use practices including their regulation and enforcement. Understanding...
Download
Read More
24 September 2025
Essential services for quality care: water, sanitation, hygiene, health care waste and electricity services...
This report provides the latest progress in ensuring universal access to water, sanitation, hygiene (WASH), waste and electricity services in health care...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Accelerating access to electricity in health-care facilities
Accelerating impact of innovations for health
Accelerating R&D processes
Accessing essential health services in fragile, conflict-affected and vulnerable settings
Features stories
All →
12 July 2023
Air pollution: The invisible health threat
16 June 2022
The making of the health and environment scorecards
13 April 2022
Ensuring radiological imaging is ethically provided: new WHO policy brief
7 April 2022
WHO and NHS to work together on decarbonization of health care systems across the world
Videos
All →
13 October 2025
Mercury exposure and health: Sixth COP meeting of the Minamata Convention on Mercury
13 October 2025
International Lead Poisoning Prevention Week of Action 2025 - message by Ruediger Krech, Director
31 January 2025
She was breathing in illegal levels of pollution
29 January 2025
Doctors for Clean Air and Climate Action: Who We Are and What We Do
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Lead exposure: early signs
Infographic
What is lead?
Infographic
Fact: Lead is toxic
Infographic
Lead exposure: long-term impacts
Events
All →
COP30 UN High-Level Event "The Belém Health Action Plan: Accelerating Action on Climate Justice and Health"
14 November 2025 13:15 – 14:45 Brazil Time
International lead poisoning prevention week
International Lead Poisoning Prevention Week 2025 - No safe level: act now to end lead exposure
19 – 25 October 2025
Webinar on Ensuring safe care for every newborn and child:
A radiation protection perspective
17 September 2025 12:30 – 14:00 CET
Webinar: Evidence on air pollution, energy access, climate change and health: Launch of Phase 2 of WHO’s Science and Policy Summaries (SPS)
4 September 2025 14:00 – 15:15 CET
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Physical environment
Air pollution
Physical environment
Chemical safety
Physical environment
Children's environmental health
Disasters
Climate change
Health interventions
Health impact assessment
Physical environment
Occupational health
Physical environment
Radiation
Socio-political determinants
Sustainable development
Physical environment
Ultraviolet radiation
Socio-political determinants
Urban health
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)