Health equity
Skip to main content
Overview
Equity is the absence of unfair, avoidable or remediable differences among groups of people, whether those groups are defined socially, economically, demographically, or geographically or by other dimensions of inequality (e.g. sex, gender, ethnicity,
disability, or sexual orientation). Health is a fundamental human right.
Health equity is achieved when everyone can attain their full potential for health and well-being.
Health and health equity are determined by the conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work, play and age, as well as biological determinants.  Structural determinants (political, legal, and economic) with social norms and institutional
processes shape the distribution of power and resources
determined by the conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work, play and
age.
People’s living conditions are often made worse by discrimination, stereotyping, and prejudice based on sex, gender, age, race, ethnicity, or disability, among other factors. Discriminatory practices are often embedded in institutional and systems
processes, leading to groups being under-represented in decision-making at all levels or underserved.
Progressively realizing the right to health means systematically identifying and eliminating inequities resulting from differences in health and in overall living conditions.
Data and evidence
Knowledge, monitoring, and analysis make up the backbone of actions needed to achieve equity.
Monitoring health inequality
must be central to a country’s health information system. This begins with the collection, analysis and reporting of data disaggregated by age, sex, education, income, disability and other factors. Qualitative data is also essential to understand the how and why of inequities. Data must also be linked with information on other determinants such as education to better understand cause-and-effect relationships i.e. how these other determinants contribute to health inequities. Part of inequality monitoring includes addressing gaps created by gender and other biases in how data has been previously collected, analysed and reported.
Equity, gender and rights-based assessment
approaches
and
tools
(including participatory approaches) should be used to systematically collect, collate, and analyze the evidence on health inequalities. This includes the health equity impacts of action by health
and
other sectors, for example reviewing specific aspects of the health system (e.g. Primary Health Care (PHC)/financing/health workforce) or of specific programmes (e.g. adolescent health/neglected tropical diseases/urban health). The findings need to be used to design responses for improved equity and ongoing monitoring of health inequalities.
Response
To improve health equity, evidence-informed action is needed:
(1)  by the health sector to ensure high-quality and effective services are available, accessible and acceptable to everyone, everywhere when they need them;
(2)  by health and or other sectors to act on the wider structural determinants of health to tackle the inequitable distribution of power and resources, and to improve daily living conditions; and
(3) the health sector needs to take the lead in monitoring health inequities through monitoring health outcomes and health service delivery – as well as working with other sectors to monitor people’s living conditions.
Key examples include:
redesigning health systems for equity e.g. pooling financial resources to enhance redistributive capacity and to progressively cover one billion additional people by 2023;
prioritising the Primary Health Care approach e.g. investment of 1% of GDP in PHC;
tackling structural determinants such as sexism, racism, ageism, classism and ablism;
addressing harmful gender norms and gender inequalities in health policies/services/programmes and having more women in leadership positions and decision-making processes;
protecting and increasing investment in health and other social sectors (through Universal Health Coverage (UHC), education and broader social protection) e.g. ensuring policies for decent work and employment conditions for all;
ensuring equitable services and infrastructure in both urban and rural areas to ensure everyone can lead healthy lives; and
continuing to monitor health inequalities and the impact of action.
Fact sheets
Human rights
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Primary health care
Disability
Questions and answers
Social determinants of health: key concepts
The triple billion targets
Database and tools
Health inequality monitor
Health equity assessment toolkit (HEAT and HEATPlus)
Health equity interactive data visualizations
Technical work
Gender, equity and human rights
Social determinants of health
News
All →
29 August 2025
Departmental update
From Gaza to Geneva: WHO Director-General hosts Palestinian disability delegation
12 August 2025
Departmental update
WHO launches Health Inequality Monitoring Network to catalyse progress towards health equity
27 June 2025
Departmental update
Partners unite to launch WHO Disability Health Equity
26 June 2025
Departmental update
Helping people live well at all ages
Latest publications
All →
24 September 2025
WHO recommendation on antibiotic prophylaxis during labour for vaginal birth
The primary audience for this guideline is health professionals who are responsible for developing national and local health protocols and policies, as...
Download
Read More
3 July 2025
Framework to implement a life course approach in practice
The WHO Framework to implement a life course approach in practice summarizes current evidence to reorient health systems to produce health and well-being,...
Download
Read More
12 May 2025
Measuring the progress and impact of the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030): framework and indicators...
Global efforts to foster healthy ageing took a significant leap forward in 2020 when WHO Member States endorsed the Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021–2030)...
Download
Read More
6 May 2025
World report on social determinants of health equity: executive summary
Unacceptable gaps persist in how long people can expect to live healthy lives depending on where they live, the communities they belong to, their education...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Addressing health inequities among people living in rural and remote areas
Advancing gender, equity and human rights through programmes and policies
Breaking barriers towards more equitable health systems for everyone
Promoting a fair and equitable response to the COVID-19 pandemic
Tackling structural racism and ethnicity-based discrimination in health
Feature stories
All →
15 October 2024
Celebrating rural women as agents of health equity and community empowerment
1 June 2024
Eight public health champions celebrated at the Seventy-seventh World Health Assembly
18 December 2023
Shedding light on the challenges of migrant workers in Latin America on Migrants’ Day
26 May 2023
Recognizing outstanding achievements with proven impact for health gains in countries
Infographics
All →
Infographic
There is no place for discrimination, racism and inequality in healthcare
Infographic
2023 Human Rights Day poster: Health is a human right
Infographic
You have the right to make decisions about your own health
Infographic
You have the right to privacy and confidentiality of your health information
Videos
All →
24 October 2025
Kamau: Let's change the end of his story!
24 October 2025
Ethan: Let's change the end of his story!
24 October 2025
Fatima: Let's change the end of her story!
24 October 2025
Ashley: Let's change the end of her story!
Events
Seventh International Conference on Family Planning
3 – 6 November 2025
Solution Session on home and community-based long-term care for older people at the Second World Summit for Social Development
4 November 2025 13:00 – 14:30 CET
Webinar: Human rights in comprehensive abortion care
24 September 2025 14:00 – 15:30 SAST
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Disability
Socio-political determinants
Gender and health
Socio-political determinants
Global health ethics
Health systems
Primary health care
Populations and demographics
Refugee and migrant health
Other
Universal health coverage