Syphilis
Skip to main content
Syphilis
29 May 2025
Key facts
Most infections are asymptomatic or unrecognized.
WHO estimates that 8 million adults between 15 and 49 years old acquired syphilis in 2022.
Syphilis in pregnancy, when not treated, treated
late or treated with the incorrect antibiotic, results in 50−80% of
cases with adverse birth outcomes.
Key populations such as gay men and other men who have sex with men are disproportionately affected.
Overview
Syphilis is a preventable and curable bacterial sexually transmitted infection (STI). If untreated, it can cause serious health issues.
Many people with syphilis do not have symptoms or do not notice them.
Syphilis is transmitted during oral, vaginal and anal sex, in pregnancy and through blood transfusion. Syphilis in pregnancy may lead to stillbirth, newborn death and babies born with syphilis (congenital syphilis).
Correct and consistent use of condoms during sex can prevent syphilis.
Rapid tests can provide results in a few minutes, which allows treatment initiation on the same clinic visit.
Symptoms
Many people with syphilis do not notice any symptoms. They can also go unnoticed by healthcare providers. Untreated, syphilis lasts many years. Syphilis has several stages.
Primary syphilis (first stage):
usually lasts around 21 days
a round, painless, usually hard sore (chancre) appears on the genitals, anus or elsewhere
the chancre may not be noticed and will heal in 3–10 days
progresses to the second stage if untreated.
Syphilis can be transmitted through chancres if they are not properly covered by a condom during sexual contact.
Secondary syphilis:
includes a non-itchy rash, usually on the palms and soles of the feet
white or grey lesions appear in warm and moist areas, such as the labia or anus, at the site of the chancre (given their infectious nature, it is essential to avoid direct contact with these lesions; condom use is a key measure to reduce partner transmission)
symptoms will go away without treatment.
Latent syphilis:
often has no symptoms
progresses to the third and final stage of syphilis (tertiary) after years if untreated
tertiary syphilis can lead to brain and cardiovascular diseases, among other conditions.
Babies born with syphilis can experience:
rashes
inflammation in the organs
anaemia
bone and joint problems
neurological conditions including blindness, deafness, meningitis
developmental delays
seizures.
Some of these symptoms may only be noticed later in life.
Prevention
Syphilis is a preventable disease.
Using condoms consistently and correctly is the best way to prevent syphilis and many other STIs. Syphilis can also spread through contact with other areas of the body not covered by a condom, including genitals, anus and mouth.
People at higher risk of infection should be tested at least once a year.
Pregnant women should be tested for syphilis at the first prenatal care visit and treated right away if the test result is positive. Congenital syphilis can only be prevented by diagnosing and treating the mother with penicillin.
People diagnosed with syphilis should
notify their sexual partners
to prevent new infections.
Diagnosis
Syphilis diagnosis is based on the person’s clinical and sexual history, physical examination, laboratory testing and sometimes radiology, as symptoms are not common or noticeable.
Syphilis is caused by the bacterium
Treponema pallidum
. Laboratory tests for syphilis include direct detection of
T. pallidum
through a microscope or indirect methods such as blood tests.
Rapid tests
are also available and can provide results in minutes, facilitating immediate treatment initiation.
Identifying asymptomatic infection through laboratory or rapid tests and providing adequate treatment of positive cases will prevent further transmission and complications, as well as adverse pregnancy outcomes, including congenital syphilis.
Congenital syphilis
There are currently no diagnostic tests for
congenital syphilis
. All live or stillborn infants of women with syphilis should be examined for evidence of congenital syphilis. For live-born infants, clinical examination, radiology (if available) and laboratory tests at birth and follow up tests will help to define treatment.
Treatment
Syphilis is treatable and curable. People who suspect they may have syphilis should speak to their health-care provider.
The early stage of syphilis is treated with a benzathine penicillin (BPG) injection. BPG is the first line treatment for syphilis and the only WHO-recommended treatment for pregnant women with syphilis. As second line treatment, doctors may also use doxycycline, ceftriaxone or azithromycin, which are antibiotic medicines.
BPG is also used to treat later stages of syphilis, but more doses are required. Doses are usually given once per week for three weeks, including when it is not possible to identify the stage of infection.
BPG is the only medicine that can prevent syphilis from being passed from a mother to baby. Babies born with syphilis (congenital syphilis), or babies whose mother had untreated syphilis, need to be treated right away to avoid serious health problems.
Transmission
Syphilis is transmitted during oral, anal or vaginal sex through contact with infectious lesions, and also during pregnancy through the placenta. Transmission typically occurs during early stages of the disease, i.e., up to 2 years after infection.
Possible complications
Syphilis and HIV infection
Syphilis increases the risk of acquiring HIV infection by approximately two-fold, as well as of other STIs, such as gonorrhoea, chlamydia, genital herpes, among others.
Severe disease
Without treatment, the tertiary phase of syphilis may lead to several complications decades after infection. At this stage, syphilis can affect multiple organs and systems, including brain, nerves, eyes, liver, heart, blood vessels, bones and joints. Tertiary syphilis can also cause death.
Neurosyphilis, ocular syphilis and otosyphilis
Neurosyphilis, ocular syphilis and otosyphilis can occur at any stage of the disease.
Neurosyphilis can cause strong headache, serious muscular problems and mental health issues, including dementia.
Ocular syphilis can cause pain in the eye, blurry vision, sensitivity to light or blindness.
Otosyphilis affects the person’s hearing and/or balance.
Congenital syphilis
Untreated syphilis in pregnancy may lead to severe negative consequences, such as stillbirth, neonatal death, prematurity, low birth weight and life-long health problems to the infected infant.
Mother-to-child transmission of syphilis
WHO response
WHO has a
global initiative for the elimination of congenital syphilis
in association with the elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and viral hepatitis B.
WHO has also developed
treatment guidelines for syphilis
and another
guideline
for testing of syphilis in pregnancy. These include the recommendation for the use of the dual HIV/syphilis test which is affordable, effective and cost-effective in some settings and context.
Additionally, WHO supports country adoption of ethical, voluntary and evidence-based strategies to
notify sexual partners
of people diagnosed with syphilis, HIV and other STIs.
WHO also facilitates country access to quality diagnostic tests and is working toward preventing global shortages of penicillin.
Related
Global STIs Programme
General information on STIs
STIs guidelines
Triple elimination initiative of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
Strategic information
Men who have sex with men
News
Maldives becomes the first country to achieve ‘triple elimination’ of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
13 October 2025
WHO expands guidance on sexually transmitted infections and reviews country progress on policy implementation
26 July 2025
First-ever guidance for Triple Elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
23 July 2025
WHO prequalifies the first triple diagnostic test for HIV, hepatitis B and syphilis, a milestone toward global disease elimination goals
15 July 2025
Fact sheets
HIV and AIDS
15 July 2025
Congenital disorders
27 February 2023
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
10 September 2025