Biologicals
Skip to main content
Overview
Biological therapeutics, also referred to as Biologicals, are those class of medicines which are grown and then purified from large-scale cell cultures of bacteria or yeast, or plant or animal cells. Biologicals are a diverse group of medicines which includes vaccines, growth factors, immune modulators, monoclonal antibodies, as well as products derived from human blood and plasma. What distinguishes biologicals from other medicines is that these are generally proteins purified from living culture systems or from blood, whereas other medicines are considered as ‘small molecules’ and are either made synthetically or purified from plants.
Due to the differences in their nature and how they are produced, biological therapeutics are regulated, tested, and controlled differently than other medicines. To help ensure their quality, safety, and efficacy, each batch of a biological therapeutic product must be tested extensively at each stage of production in order to ensure consistency with prior batches.  The use of WHO international reference standards helps to further ensure the consistency of a product across many batches as well as to allow the comparability of biologicals between manufacturers and/or countries.  The establishment of general requirements applicable across a diverse range of product classes governing starting materials, manufacturing and regulatory oversight is an essential aspect of this process. Whereas guidelines may be established for specific biologicals to help .
Impact
The beneficial impact of biologicals is as diverse as the types of products themselves:
Vaccines are one of the most powerful and cost-effective ways to reduce the global burden of disease and are estimated to save 2–3 million lives every year. Some diseases, such as smallpox and two types of polio, have been eradicated thanks to global efforts to vaccinate and control their spread. However, as many transmissible diseases continue to claim millions of lives annually, the development of new vaccines and other biological products, and new methods to improve their quality, potency, safety and efficacy, remain major challenges in the field of public health.
Blood products are life-saving products used extensively during surgery, in patients with traumas, or those with bleeding disorders, and in people undergoing chemotherapy for the treatment of cancer.  Most donated blood is fractioned into its separate components so a single unit may be used to help multiple patients in need.
There are numerous other biological therapeutics, such as insulin used in the treatment of diabetes, interferons for viral infections and cancer therapy, monoclonal antibodies that are also used in the treatment of some cancers or autoimmune diseases.  This class of agent also includes stem cells and some gene therapies.
Together, these products are major human achievements and compelling examples of the power of biologicals in medicine.
WHO response
WHO works with Member States, Collaborating Centres, partners and experts through its biological standardization programme to develop and revise guidance on biotherapeutic products and to establish international reference standards. The guidelines produced are promoted through their publication on the WHO website, as well as through workshops and training sessions to facilitate their implementation. This outreach has proved valuable in promoting WHO recommendations that promote international harmonization of guidance for biological therapeutics.
Similarly, the development and promotion of WHO international reference standards helps ensure that biological therapeutics are standardized between different manufacturers, countries, and laboratories.  They are used extensively in ensuring the quality and efficacy of biologicals, as well as in the calibration of diagnostic tests.
Several key programs reflect the importance WHO places on biological medicines as powerful agents to reduce the global burden of disease. These include the Global Vaccine Action Plan (GVAP) and the Blood Regulators Network (BRN), which is comprised of leading international authorities on blood, blood products and in vitro diagnostic devices. WHO also celebrates World Immunization Week each April, with associated events aimed at promoting the use and understanding of vaccines and combat vaccine hesitancy around the world.
Fact sheets
Blood safety and availability
Immunization coverage
Cholera
Congenital disorders
Diarrhoeal disease
Ebola disease
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis D
Hepatitis E
Cervical cancer
Influenza (avian and other zoonotic)
Influenza (seasonal)
Japanese encephalitis
Malaria
Measles
Meningitis
Mercury
Newborns: improving survival and well-being
Pneumonia in children
Poliomyelitis
Rubella
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Databases and tools
WHO Prequalified of Medical Products
Catalogue of International Reference Preparations
Initiatives and groups
Expert Committee on Biological Standardization
Technical work
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals (IVB)
Health product and policy standards (HPS)
International Nonproprietary Names Programme and Classification of Medical Products
Regulation and Prequalification (RPQ)
News
All →
13 June 2025
Departmental update
mRNA Technology Transfer Programme’s Phase 2.0 discussed with partners on the sidelines of G20 Summit
26 May 2023
News release
WHO and Republic of Korea sign landmark agreement to boost biomanufacturing capacity
14 November 2022
Departmental update
Marking World Diabetes Day: actions for better access to treatment and care
8 June 2021
Departmental update
WHO publishes new guidance to accelerate in-country registration of WHO prequalified in vitro diagnostics
Our work
Accelerating R&D processes
Immunizing against HPV
Standardizing biotherapeutic products
Providing International biological reference preparations
Developing norms and standards in the epidemic context
Latest publications
All →
3 July 2025
WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization: eightieth report
Eightieth meeting held using a hybrid format in which Committee members and the WHO Secretariat met in person in Geneva from 7 to 11 October 2024 with...
Download
Read More
30 June 2025
Access to safe, effective and quality-assured health products and technologies
The roadmap for WHO action 2025–2030 outlines to Member States, and other stakeholders WHO’s unique role and approach for increasing access...
Download
Read More
31 December 2024
Guideline on management of pneumonia and diarrhoea in children up to 10 years of age
Pneumonia and diarrhoea account for 23% of under-five mortality and were responsible for an estimated 1.17 million deaths in children under five globally....
Download
Read More
29 October 2024
WHO guideline on the prevention and diagnosis of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease
Rheumatic fever (RF) and Rheumatic heart disease (RHD) are a preventable public health problem in low- and middle-income countries and in marginalized...
Download
Read More
Events
All →
WHO EPI-WIN webinar: Emerging biological threats:  what are they and why are they a risk
15 December 2022 14:00 – 15:00 CET
Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction 2022, Bali, Indonesia - Advancing DRR in building safe and resilient health facilities: lessons learnt from COVID-19
27 May 2022
Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction 2022, Bali, Indonesia - Integrating biological hazards in national disaster management policy: a call for whole of society action
26 May 2022
Documents
All →
21 November 2025
Guidelines on the replacement or removal of animal tests
for the quality control of biological products
Adopted on the recommendation of the Eighty-first meeting of the World Health
Organization Expert Committee on Biological Standardization, 13–16...
Download
Read More
3 November 2025
Global market landscape of vaccine manufacturing and procurement
This landscape analysis aims to present a current picture of the global vaccine ecosystem from the purchaser (country) and supplier (manufacturer) perspectives...
Download
Read More
Multimedias
All →
12 January 2025
Strengthening implementation of home-based records for maternal, newborn and child health
Infographic
How do CTC and ECTC relate to each other?
Infographic
Every $1 spent on childhood immunizations in Africa returns $44 in economic benefits
Infographic
One in five children in Africa does not receive the vaccines they need
Feature stories
All →
29 March 2021
Standardization of vaccines for coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
Related health topics
Physiological interventions
Blood products
Health systems
Blood transfusion safety
Diseases and conditions
Cholera
Health systems
Health Laws
Diseases and conditions
Congenital disorders
Communicable diseases
Ebola virus disease
Health interventions
In vitro diagnostics
Health interventions
Medicines
Other
Universal health coverage
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization