Health technology assessment - Global
Skip to main content
Overview
New interventions and technologies are constantly being developed and refined but their impacts on health, and implications for health systems, are not always clear. Health technology assessment (HTA) is a systematic and multidisciplinary evaluation of the properties of health technologies and interventions covering both their direct and indirect consequences. It is a multidisciplinary process that aims to determine the value of a health technology and to inform guidance on how these technologies can be used in health systems around the world. HTA is a transparent and accountable process that can be used by decision makers and other stakeholders to support the decision-making process in health care at the policy level by providing evidence about given technologies It has been described as a bridge that connects the world of research to that of policy making.
WHO Response
As health technology assessment is a multidisciplinary approach that is applicable to all levels of a health system, WHO’s use of HTA is broad and integrated into several programs. For example, the HTA team conducts a global survey of HTA processes in WHO Member States and prepares guidance for its implementation in health systems. HTA is also used in broader evidence-informed health-related decision making, and in fair pricing guidelines for the procurement of health products.
This work is conducted through both WHO’s global partnerships and programmes and through the WHO regional offices. The regional offices support the development of HTA capacity in their Member States though advocacy and raising awareness of the use of HTA in policy development, guidance for best practices and the coordination and collaboration between Member States and established partners.
Impact
WHO’s efforts to broaden the use of HTA has resulted in more tools and resources being available for HTA globally. For example, the WHO-CHOICE tools have been used to show efficiencies in procurement in different regions of the world, and HTA methods have been applied to find cost-effective interventions to reduce road-traffic accidents in sub-Saharan Africa and South-East Asia. At the country level, WHO-CHOICE information was used in Ethiopia to determine the affordability and financial efficacy of universal health coverage.
Understanding the importance of HTA in support of universal health coverage, resolution WHA67.23 was approved during the 67th World Health Assembly. The resolution recognizes the importance of evidence-based policy development and decision-making in health systems, and HTA’s role in sustainable and effective health systems. It also calls for the promotion of HTA within national frameworks, such as those for health system research, health professional education and the establishment of universal health coverage.
WHO Resolutions
WHO resolution 67.23 - Health intervention and technology assessment in support of universal
health coverage
WHO resolution 60.29 - Health Technologies
SEA/RC66/R4 - Health intervention and technology assessment in support of universal health coverage
WHO Resolution A72/A/CONF./2 Rev.1 - Improving the transparency of markets for medicines, vaccines, and other health products
Database and tools
UHC Compendium
Resource guide on the use of health technology assessment in health benefit package design processes
Technical work
Health Financing and Economics
Medical devices and Diagnostics
Latest publications
All →
30 May 2025
Health technology assessment of medical devices, 2nd ed
HTA is a multidisciplinary process used to evaluate the clinical, economic, ethical implications and social impact of new health technologies. This...
Download
Read More
3 March 2015
2015 Global Survey on Health Technology Assessment by National Authorities
As countries strive to deliver universal health coverage, the process of deciding which health technologies and interventions to invest in has become increasingly...
Download
Read More
1 January 2015
Developing an approach for using health technology assessments in reimbursement systems for medical products
This report was developed during a two day meeting in Geneva, in July, 2015. It discusses the use of health technology assessment (HTA) in low and middle...
Download
Read More
26 October 2010
Package of essential noncommunicable (‎PEN)‎ disease interventions for primary health care in low-resource...
The WHO Package of Essential Noncommunicable Disease Interventions (WHO PEN) for primary care in low-resource settings is an innovative and action-oriented...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Assessing the progress of Health Technology Assessment use
Providing guidance to countries on institutionalizing Health Technology Assessment
Strengthening collaboration on Health Technology Assessment
Video
All →
31 December 2014
Presentation by Dr. Adham Ismail
Events
All →
Fair Pricing Forum 2024
6 – 8 February 2024
The Global Survey on HTA and Health Benefit Packages: Interactive Database and Findings
16 December 2021 14:00 – 15:00 CET
Fair Pricing Forum - 2021
13 – 22 April 2021
Country Profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Other
Health economics
Health systems
Health financing
Health interventions
In vitro diagnostics
Health interventions
Medical devices
Health interventions
Medicines
Health systems
Primary health care
Other
Universal health coverage