Cardiovascular diseases
Skip to main content
Overview
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the leading cause of death globally,
taking an estimated 17.9 million lives each year. CVDs are a group
of disorders of the heart and blood vessels and include coronary heart
disease, cerebrovascular disease, rheumatic heart disease and other conditions.
More than four out of five CVD deaths are due to heart attacks and strokes, and
one third of these deaths occur prematurely in people under 70 years of
age.
The most important behavioural risk factors of heart disease and stroke are
unhealthy diet, physical inactivity, tobacco use and harmful use of alcohol. Amongst
environmental risk factors, air pollution is an important factor. The effects
of behavioural risk factors may show up in individuals as raised blood
pressure, raised blood glucose, raised blood lipids, and overweight and
obesity. These “intermediate risks factors” can be measured in primary care
facilities and indicate an increased risk of heart attack, stroke, heart
failure and other complications.
Cessation of tobacco use, reduction of salt in the diet, eating more fruit
and vegetables, regular physical activity and avoiding harmful use of alcohol
have been shown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. Health policies
that create conducive environments for making healthy choices affordable and
available, as well as improving air quality and reducing pollution, are
essential for motivating people to adopt and sustain healthy behaviours.
Identifying those at highest risk of CVDs and ensuring they receive
appropriate treatment can prevent premature deaths. Access to noncommunicable
disease medicines and basic health technologies in all primary health care
facilities is essential to ensure that those in need receive treatment and
counselling.
Symptoms
Heart attack and stroke
Often, there are no symptoms of the underlying disease of the blood vessels. A heart attack or stroke may be the first sign of underlying disease. Symptoms of a heart attack include:
pain or discomfort in the centre of the chest; and/or
pain or discomfort in the arms, the left shoulder, elbows, jaw, or back.
In addition the person may experience difficulty in breathing or shortness of breath; nausea or vomiting; light-headedness or faintness; a cold sweat; and turning pale. Women are more likely than men to have shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, and back or jaw pain.
The most common symptom of a stroke is sudden weakness of the face, arm, or leg, most often on one side of the body. Other symptoms include sudden onset of:
numbness of the face, arm, or leg, especially on one side of the body;
confusion, difficulty speaking or understanding speech;
difficulty seeing with one or both eyes;
difficulty walking, dizziness and/or loss of balance or coordination;
severe headache with no known cause; and/or
fainting or unconsciousness.
People experiencing these symptoms should seek medical care immediately.
Rheumatic heart disease
Symptoms of rheumatic heart disease include: shortness of breath, fatigue, irregular heartbeats, chest pain and fainting. Symptoms of rheumatic fever (which can cause rheumatic heart disease if not treated) include: fever, pain and swelling of the joints, nausea, stomach cramps and vomiting.
Treatment
WHO supports governments to prevent, manage and monitor CVDs by developing global strategies to reduce the incidence, morbidity and mortality of these diseases. These strategies include reducing risk factors, developing standards of care, enhancing health system capacity to care for patients with CVD, and monitoring disease patterns and trends to inform national and global actions.
The risk factors for CVD include behaviours such as tobacco use, an unhealthy diet, harmful use of alcohol and inadequate physical activity. They also include physiological factors, including high blood pressure (hypertension), high blood cholesterol and high blood sugar or glucose, which are linked to underlying social determinants and drivers such as ageing, income and urbanization.
Fact sheets
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs)
Sodium reduction
Hypertension
Technical work
Noncommunicable diseases, rehabilitation and disability
News
All →
23 September 2025
News release
Uncontrolled high blood pressure puts over a billion people at risk
19 May 2025
News release
WHO recognizes four countries with life-saving trans fat elimination policies
6 March 2025
Departmental update
Strengthening public health across Lebanon with EIB Global
2 November 2023
Departmental update
Climate change and noncommunicable diseases: connections
Latest publications
All →
14 October 2025
SEAHEARTS: Accelerating prevention and control of cardiovascular diseases in the South-East Asia Region
Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are a leading cause of mortality and morbidity in the WHO South-East (SE) Asia Region. Global Health Estimates of 2021 indicated...
Download
Read More
6 October 2025
Third Regional Consultation on SEAHEARTS: Extended and Expanded Milestones 2030
Third Regional Consultation on SEAHEARTS: Extended and Expanded Milestones 203025 September 2025 | 09:30- 11:30 ISTThe Third Regional Consultation on SEAHEARTS:...
Download
Read More
5 August 2025
Second Regional Consultation (virtual) on SEAHEARTS Initiatives: Achievements and Lessons learnt
The Second Regional Consultation on the SEAHEARTS: Accelerating prevention and controlof CVDs in the South-East Asia Region (SEA/RC76/R5) initiative was...
Download
Read More
30 April 2025
Integrating stroke services in health-care systems: A practical approach
A stroke is a serious life-threatening medical condition that occurs when the blood supply to a part of the brain is cut off. Stroke is one of the...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
9 December 2022
NCD Lab series: Working with children, families, and schools to tackle childhood obesity in Chile
30 November 2022
NCD Lab series: building India's largest network of health promoting schools
28 September 2017
Philippines embraces efforts to step up cardiovascular disease care
29 September 2016
Treating cardiovascular disease in Barbados
Events
All →
WHO Capacity-Building Webinar Series: Strengthening national readiness for acute coronary syndrome (ACS) and stroke care
2 – 15 October 2025
Launch of the WHO Global Hypertension Report 2025
23 September 2025 07:30 – 09:00 ET
NCD Hard Talks webinar: SEAHEARTS for CVD Control: All hands on deck
4 May 2023 13:00 – 14:30 UTC Time
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Hypertension
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases