Alcohol
Skip to main content
Overview
Alcohol is a toxic and psychoactive substance with dependence producing properties. In many of today’s societies, alcoholic beverages are a routine part of the social landscape for many in the population. This is particularly true for those in social environments with high visibility and societal influence, nationally and internationally, where alcohol frequently accompanies socializing. In this context, it is easy to overlook or discount the health and social damage caused or contributed to by drinking.
Alcohol consumption contributes to 2.6 million deaths each year globally as well as to the disabilities and poor health of millions of people. Overall, harmful use of alcohol is responsible for 4.7% of the global burden of disease.
Harmful use of alcohol is accountable for 6,9 % and 2.0% of the global burden of disease for males and females respectively. Alcohol is the leading risk factor for premature mortality and disability among those aged 20 to 39 years, accounting for 13% of all deaths in this age group. Disadvantaged and especially vulnerable populations have higher rates of alcohol-related death and hospitalization.
Impact
Alcohol as an intoxicant affects a wide range of structures and processes in the central nervous system and increases the risk for intentional and unintentional injuries and adverse social consequences. Alcohol has considerable toxic effects on the digestive and cardiovascular systems. Alcoholic beverages are classified as carcinogenic by the International Agency for Research on Cancer and increase the risk of several cancer types. Alcohol as an immunosuppressant increases the risk of communicable diseases, including tuberculosis and HIV.
Both the volume of lifetime alcohol use and a combination of context, frequency of alcohol consumption and amount consumed per occasion increase the risk of the wide range of health and social harms. The risks increase largely in a dose-dependent manner with the volume of alcohol consumed and with frequency of drinking, and exponentially with the amount consumed on a single occasion. Surrogate and illegally produced alcohols can bring an extra health risk from toxic contaminants.
Since any alcohol use is associated with some short-term and long-term health risks, it is difficult to define universally applicable population-based thresholds for low-risk drinking.
WHO response
WHO works with Member States and partners to prevent and reduce the harmful use of alcohol as a public health priority. The
2010 WHO Global strategy to reduce the harmful use of alcohol
and the
2022 WHO Global action plan
are the most comprehensive international alcohol policy documents, endorsed by WHO Member States, that provides guidance on reducing the harmful use of alcohol at all levels. WHO’s approach aligns with and furthers work towards the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), specifically target 3.5 on substance abuse, including harmful use of alcohol, and target 3.4 on the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) and promoting mental health and well-being.
WHO has identified that the most cost-effective actions to reduce the harmful use of alcohol include increasing taxes on alcoholic beverages, enforcing restrictions on exposure to alcohol advertising, and restrictions on the physical availability of retailed alcohol. In addition, enforcing drink driving countermeasures and securing access to screening, brief interventions, and treatment are effective and ethically sound interventions. The most cost-effective interventions are at the focus of WHO-led SAFER initiative aimed at providing support for Member States in reducing the harmful use of alcohol.
WHO’s work provides special attention to reducing harm to people other than the drinker and to populations that are at particular risk from harmful use of alcohol, such as children, adolescents, women of child-bearing age, pregnant and breastfeeding women, indigenous people and other minority groups or groups with low socioeconomic status.
Fact sheets
Alcohol
Databases and tools
Global Information System on Alcohol and Health (GISAH)
Resources for the Prevention and Treatment of Substance Use Disorders
SDG Target 3.5 Substance abuse
Initiatives and groups
SAFER initiative
Resolutions and decisions
Accelerating action to reduce the harmful use of alcohol (EB146.14)
Global strategy to reduce the harmful use of alcohol (WHA63.13)
Strategies to reduce the harmful use of alcohol (WHA61.4)
Public-health problems caused by harmful use of alcohol (WHA58.26)
All resolutions, decisions and records
Technical work
Alcohol, Drugs and Addictive Behaviours
Less Alcohol
Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use
Noncommunicable Diseases
Health Promotion
Social Determinants of Health
News
All →
12 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO released updated guideline on HIV service delivery
10 June 2025
Departmental update
WHO launches new Collaborating Centre on Alcohol Policy and Public Health Research
25 June 2024
News release
Over 3 million annual deaths due to alcohol and drug use, majority among men
9 September 2023
Departmental update
LESS ALCOHOL WEBINAR SERIES: Addressing blind spots to accelerate the implementation of high-impact policy interventions 2023
Latest publications
All →
5 June 2025
Noncommunicable diseases progress monitor 2025
The fifth in a series, the World Health Organization's 2025 Noncommunicable Diseases (NCD) Progress Monitor provides a snapshot of country progress toward...
Download
Read More
16 May 2025
Restricting alcohol availability in practice: evidence from selected countries
Alcoholic beverages contain ethanol, an established carcinogen and psychoactive and toxic substance that can cause dependence, and they are associated...
Download
Read More
16 April 2025
Can homes, schools and digital platforms drive young people’s alcohol consumption?
Alcohol consumption among young people remains a public health concern across the globe: in low- and middle-income countries consumption has increased,...
Download
Read More
8 August 2024
South-East Asia Regional workshop to address the challenges of illicit tobacco trade and unrecorded alcohol,...
This regional workshop was planned to address the challenges of illicit tobacco trade and unrecorded alcohol consumption in the countries of the Region....
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
8 October 2025
A critical step toward saving lives: helping humanitarian workers respond to substance use with empathy and care
6 May 2025
Strengthening alcohol control and road safety policies
17 December 2024
Working across sectors to combat the burden of NCDs in Nepal
2 May 2022
Tackling the harmful effects of alcohol
locally in the city of Tarumã, Brazil
Videos
All →
10 May 2022
Regulating cross-border marketing of alcohol
14 October 2020
Alcohol and well-being video
25 January 2023
Reducing youth exposure to alcogenic environments: What can be learnt from community-led approaches?
16 November 2022
Webinar: Women, men and alcohol: Why is gender important in alcohol control policies
3 November 2022
Webinar video: No and low-alcohol beverages: Real improvement or apparent solution?
17 October 2022
Restricting alcohol availability: How can common barriers be overcome? Webinar by WHO - 3 October 2022
Events
8 – 9 July 2025
The Technical Advisory Group on Alcohol and Drug Epidemiology (TAG-ADE
Alcohol, Drugs and Addictive Behaviors (ADA)
24 – 26 June 2025
Fifth WHO Forum on Alcohol, Drugs and Addictive Behaviours (FADAB)
7 – 21 June 2024
Webinar series: Regulating digital marketing of tobacco, alcohol, food and non-alcoholic beverages and breast-milk substitutes
7 November 2023 13:00 – 14:00 UTC Time
Youth and alcohol: do new trends demand new solutions?
Related health topics
Substances
Drugs (psychoactive)
Substances
Tobacco
Health systems
Health taxes
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Health interventions
Suicide prevention
Behavioural interventions
Health promotion
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Physical environment
Road traffic injuries