Common goods for health
Skip to main content
Overview
Common goods for health are population-based functions or interventions that require collective financing, either from governments or donors based on the following conditions:
Contribute to health and economic progress;
There is a clear economic rationale for interventions based on market failures, with focus on (i) Public Goods (Non-Rival, Non-Exclusionary) or (ii) large social externalities.
These common goods for health are fundamental to protecting and promoting health and well-being. Due to the broad-based benefits of these goods, related externalities, and often multisectoral nature, targeted action and investments are necessary by both governments and the global community.
Common goods for health generally fall into five categories:
Policy and Coordination (ex. disease control policies and strategies)
Taxes and Subsidies (ex. taxes on products with impact on health to create market signals leading to behaviour change)
Regulations and Legislation (ex. environmental regulations and guidelines)
Information, analysis & communication* (ex. surveillance systems)
Population Services* (ex. medical and solid waste management)
*Some may have private goods characteristics and related private financing in certain circumstances.
Attributes
The common goods for health functions and interventions have been grouped into five categories explained below to provide greater clarity for formulating budgets, plans and implementation arrangements.
Planning and coordination
The formation of national policies, institutional capacities and coordination mechanism across sectors and levels of government. These must be inclusive of all groups and will need to be monitored and formally linked with national budgetary processes.
Regulation and legislation
Refers to use of a government’s coercive power to impose constraints on organizations and individuals. It includes the full range of legal instruments (such as laws, decrees, orders, codes, administrative rules and guidelines).
Taxes and subsidies
Financial instruments that influence individual and market behaviour, which can have a considerable impact on population health.
Information collection, analysis and communication
Involves the collection and analyses of information, and the monitoring of population-level change through a comprehensive and centrally-coordinated information system.
Population services
Services that impact all of society and are fundamental to public health (such as water and sanitation, waste management, vector control and emergency response operations), but which markets either do not provide or under-provide.
Key policy messages
Common goods for health are essential to building national and global health security and for making progress towards universal health coverage, including preventing and mitigating epidemic and environmental threats to societies. Well-functioning health systems rely on strong governance, clear regulations and standards, population-based services and coordinated policies, all of which are common goods for health. Common goods for heath provide the economic rationale for why it is necessary for governments to invest in
International Health Regulation 2005
capacities for health security and critical functions to ensure progress towards universal health coverage.
The common goods for health agenda must be integrated into annual and multiyear budget dialogues as well as health financing and national budget reform dialogues. Financing these cross-cutting functions requires pooled resources, as well as coordination across relevant sectors. Medium-term expenditure frameworks can aid in this coordination and can make sure common goods for health are prioritized over time and across levels of government, even in the face of fiscal and political constraints. Some countries may adjust their public financial management to expand and reprioritize budgetary space to allow funds to flow to these functions.
Fact sheets
Sanitation
Drinking-water
Climate change
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Commercial determinants of health
Technical work
Health Systems Governance and Financing
News
All →
2 October 2020
Departmental update
The Russian Federation steps up support to WHO for global health security and noncommunicable diseases
2 October 2020
Departmental update
WHO welcomes a contribution of US$ 90 million from The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to support its COVID-19 global response
17 August 2020
Departmental update
The Republic of Korea and WHO sign new Memorandum of Understanding, committing US$ 6 million in COVID-19 PCR test kits for 24 countries in the African region
Latest publications
All →
14 September 2021
Financing common goods for health
Common Goods for Health (CGH) are the core population-based functions or interventions that are essential to the health and well-being of entire societies....
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Pooling revenues and reducing fragmentation
Promoting strategic purchasing
Fostering fiscal dialogue between finance and health
Leveraging public financial management for better health
Feature stories
All →
6 April 2020
The Path to Achieving Universal Health Coverage and the Sustainable Development Goal (SDGs): Prince Mahidol Award Conference (PMAC)
20 December 2019
Global Action Plan Signatory Agencies back Ghana’s Health Financing Reforms
21 April 2019
Analyzing the Political Economy of UHC Reform in Thailand
Event
All →
11 November 2019
Health taxes joint planning session
Related health topics
Health systems
Health accounts
Health systems
Health budget
Health systems
Health financing
Health systems
Health systems governance
Health systems
Health taxes
Other
Universal health coverage
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)