Gender
Skip to main content
Overview
Gender refers to the characteristics of women, men, girls and boys that are socially constructed.  This includes norms, behaviours and roles associated with being a woman, man, girl or boy, as well as relationships with each other. As a social construct, gender varies from society to society and can change over time.
Gender is hierarchical and produces inequalities that intersect with other social and economic inequalities.  Gender-based discrimination intersects with other factors of discrimination, such as ethnicity, socioeconomic status, disability, age, geographic location, gender identity and sexual orientation, among others. This is referred to as intersectionality.
Gender interacts with but is different from sex, which refers to the different biological and physiological characteristics of females, males and intersex persons, such as chromosomes, hormones and reproductive organs. Gender and sex are related to but different from gender identity. Gender identity refers to a person’s deeply felt, internal and individual experience of gender, which may or may not correspond to the person’s physiology or designated sex at birth.
Gender influences people’s experience of and access to healthcare. The way that health services are organized and provided can either limit or enable a person’s access to healthcare information, support and services, and the outcome of those encounters. Health services should be affordable, accessible and acceptable to all, and they should be provided with quality, equity and dignity.
Gender inequality and discrimination faced by women and girls puts their health and well-being at risk.  Women and girls often face greater barriers than men and boys to accessing health information and services. These barriers include restrictions on mobility; lack of access to decision-making power; lower literacy rates; discriminatory attitudes of communities and healthcare providers; and lack of training and awareness amongst healthcare providers and health systems of the specific health needs and challenges of women and girls.
Consequently, women and girls face greater risks of unintended pregnancies, sexually transmitted infections including HIV, cervical cancer, malnutrition, lower vision, respiratory infections, malnutrition and elder abuse, amongst others. Women and girls also face unacceptably high levels of violence rooted in gender inequality and are at grave risk of harmful practices such as female genital mutilation, and child, early and forced marriage. WHO figures show that about 1 in 3 women worldwide have experienced either physical and/or sexual intimate partner violence or non-partner sexual violence in their lifetime.
Harmful gender norms – especially those related to rigid notions of masculinity – can also affect boys and men’s health and wellbeing negatively. For example, specific notions of masculinity may encourage boys and men to smoke, take sexual and other health risks, misuse alcohol and not seek help or health care. Such gender norms also contribute to boys and men perpetrating violence – as well as being subjected to violence themselves. They can also have grave implications for their mental health.
Rigid gender norms also negatively affect people with diverse gender identities, who often face violence, stigma and discrimination as a result, including in healthcare settings. Consequently, they are at higher risk of HIV and mental health problems, including suicide.
WHO's role
The work of WHO is aligned with and supports the advancement of the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly SDG 3:
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
, and SDG 5:
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
. The Organization is committed to non-discrimination and to leaving no-one behind. It seeks to ensure that every person, regardless of gender or sex, can live a healthy life.
Gender inequality hinders progress to fulfill everyone’s right to health. Efforts in support of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) must focus on reaching those most often left behind, such as marginalized, stigmatized and geographically isolated people of all sexes and gender identities, with a special focus on those in situations of increased vulnerability, including poor people, persons with disabilities and racialized and indigenous peoples. Addressing discrimination against women and girls is critical to achieving UHC.
WHO develops norms, standards and guidelines on gender-responsive health service provision and delivery, and commissions research on issues focusing on gender equality, human rights and health equity. WHO also supports country-level action to strengthen health sector response to gender-based violence, as well as to address gender equality in health workforce development and gender-related barriers to health services.
Fact sheets
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Human rights
Violence against women
Questions and answers
Gender and health
WHO/Europe brief: Transgender health in the context of ICD-11
Databases and tools
Monitoring health for the SDGs: 2019 World Health Statistics disaggregated by sex
Health inequality monitor
A tool for strengthening gender-sensitive national HIV and SRH monitoring and evaluation system
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 67.15 Strengthening the role of the health system in addressing violence, in particular against women and girls, and against children
WHA 60.25 Strategy for integrating gender analysis and actions into the work of WHO
Training
I know gender training
WHO, Gender mainstreaming for health managers
Technical work
Gender, Equity and Human Rights
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
News
All →
5 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO at the 151st IPU Assembly: advancing health, rights and resilience through parliamentary action
26 June 2025
Departmental update
Helping people live well at all ages
6 May 2025
Departmental update
Indigenous leadership and views must shape new Global Health Action Plan
10 April 2025
Departmental update
WHO at 150th IPU Assembly: elevating health equity and global solidarity
Publications
All →
19 November 2025
Violence against women prevalence estimates, 2023
Violence against women and girls is a human rights violation and public health problem that transcends economic, social and national boundaries. It has...
Download
Read More
19 November 2025
RESPECT women: preventing violence against women, 2nd ed.
Violence against women is a major public health problem rooted in gender inequality and is a gross violation of women’s human rights, affecting the...
Download
Read More
28 September 2025
Report of the 11th Meeting of the WHO Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts for Maternal,...
This is the report from the 11th meeting (June 10- 12 2025) of the strategic and technical advisory group of experts (STAGE) for maternal newborn child...
Download
Read More
17 June 2025
Implementation guidance on transitioning to midwifery models of care
Enjoying the highest attainable standards of health is a fundamental human right. Despite progress in recent decades, maternal and neonatal mortality,...
Download
Read More
15 October 2024
Frequently asked questions on sexual and gender diversity, health and human rights: an introduction to...
This publication defines key concepts and terminology in health, gender identity and sexual diversity, and clarifies their meaning in WHO guidance,...
Download
Read More
Our work
Addressing health inequities among people living in rural and remote areas
Promoting a fair and equitable response to the COVID-19 pandemic
Strengthening health sector response to gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies
Improving LGBTIQ+ health and well-being with consideration for SOGIESC
Breaking barriers towards more equitable health systems for everyone
Reviewing national health programmes to leave no one behind
Mainstreaming gender in WHO's programmes and actions
Ensuring gender-responsive health systems
Closing data gaps in gender
Advancing gender, equity and human rights through programmes and policies
Feature stories
All →
15 October 2024
Celebrating rural women as agents of health equity and community empowerment
6 May 2024
Donors making a difference: CERF helps WHO deliver on its pledge for one billion more people better protected from health emergencies
7 December 2022
In Nigeria, self-administered contraception is helping women to access their sexual and reproductive health rights
18 May 2022
Community participation for a PHC-led, equitable recovery in Costa Rica
Infographics
All →
Infographic
End coercion in mental health
Infographic
World Health Worker Week 2024: Fair share for health and care
Infographic
Rural women play important roles as health and care workers in their communities
Infographic
Almost twice as many babies are born to adolescent girls  in rural areas than in urban areas
Videos
All →
11 November 2024
WHO’s work on health response to gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies
26 May 2024
Gender equity - Color - 2024 "GRAND PRIX" for Better Health and Well-being
12 March 2024
Fair share for health and care
12 March 2024
Highlights: Fair share for health and care report launch at CSW68
Documentary series
19 November 2020
Human rights: Violence against women
18 November 2020
Human rights: Comprehensive sexuality education
18 November 2020
Human rights: Contraception
18 November 2020
Human rights: Maternal mortality and morbidity
Events
All →
Seventh International Conference on Family Planning
3 – 6 November 2025
Solution Session on home and community-based long-term care for older people at the Second World Summit for Social Development
4 November 2025 13:00 – 14:30 CET
Webinar: Human rights in comprehensive abortion care
24 September 2025 14:00 – 15:30 SAST
Training health care professionals to address sex and gender inequalities
26 September 2025 12:30 – 13:15 CET
Spotlight
Six Priorities for women and health
Concrete action is needed to ensure women and girls in all their diversity can enjoy the right to health – during, and beyond the COVID-19 pandemic.
Facts in pictures
22 February 2018
Health inequities and their causes
Resources
WHO Bulletin: Gender, health and the 2030 agenda for sustainable development
The Lancet: Gender mainstreaming within WHO: Not without equity and human rights
Related health topics
Health systems
Health workforce
Socio-political determinants
Social determinants of health
Human behaviour
Violence against women