Diarrhoea
Skip to main content
Overview
Diarrhoeal disease is the second leading cause of death in children under five years old, and was responsible for the deaths of 370,000  children in 2019. The most severe threat posed by diarrhoea is dehydration. During an episode of diarrhoea, water and electrolytes including sodium, chloride, potassium and bicarbonate are lost through liquid stools, vomit, sweat, urine and breathing. A person with diarrhoea becomes dehydrated when these losses are not replaced. In addition, diarrhoea is a major cause of malnutrition, making the person more susceptible to future bouts of diarrhoea and to other diseases.
There are three clinical types of diarrhoea, each with its specific treatments:
Acute watery diarrhoea, which may last several hours or days, and includes      cholera.
Acute bloody diarrhoea, also called dysentery.
Persistent diarrhoea, lasting 14 days or longer.
In the past, for most children, severe dehydration and fluid loss were the main causes of dying from diarrhoea. Now, other causes such as septic bacterial infections are likely to account for an increasing proportion of all diarrhoea-associated deaths.
Exclusive breastfeeding is protective and prevents diarrhoea from occurring in young children. Breastfeeding also reduces the severity of diarrhoea.
Innovative activities and demand creation are important for achieving behaviour change and sustaining long-term preventive practices to combat preventable morbidity and mortality from diarrhoeal diseases.
Symptoms
Diarrhoea is the passage of 3 or more loose or liquid stools per day, or more frequently than is normal for the individual. It is usually a symptom of gastrointestinal infection, which can be caused by a variety of bacterial, viral and parasitic organisms. Infection is spread through contaminated food or drinking-water, or from person to person as a result of poor hygiene.
Treatment
Key measures to prevent diarrhoea include the following:
access to safe drinking-water.
use of improved sanitation.
hand washing with soap.
exclusive breastfeeding for the first      six months of life.
good personal and food hygiene.
health education about how      infections spread.
rotavirus vaccination.
Key measures to treat diarrhoea include the following:
Rehydration with
oral rehydration salts (ORS)
solution: ORS, particularly the low osmolarity formula, are a proven      life-saving commodity for the treatment of children with diarrhoea.
Rehydration may require intravenous fluids in case of severe dehydration or shock.
Zinc supplements
reduce      the duration of a diarrhoea episode by 25% and are associated with a 30%      reduction in stool volume.
Nutrient-rich foods:
the      vicious circle of malnutrition and diarrhoea can be broken by
continuing to give nutrient-rich foods
– including breast milk – during an episode, and by giving a nutritious      diet – including exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life      – to children when they are well.
Consulting a health professional
, in      particular for management of persistent diarrhoea, or when there is blood      in the stool, or if there are signs of dehydration.
Adequate nutrition
is key to improving natural defenses, starting with exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months of life.
Fact sheets
Diarrhoeal disease
E. coli
Cholera
Campylobacter
Salmonella (non-typhoidal)
Drinking-water
Sanitation
Immunization coverage
Questions and answers
What are the key health dangers for children?
Databases and tools
Monitoring Visualization Tool for the Global Action Plan for Pneumonia and Diarrhoea (GAPPD)
Global Health Observatory: Water and Sanitation
Disease outbreak news
Emergencies preparedness, response
Technical work
Child Health and Development Unit
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Ageing
Food safety
Water sanitation hygiene
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
News
All →
17 October 2024
Departmental update
Signing ceremony for contribution agreements between WHO and France
25 January 2024
Departmental update
WHO releases a web version of the second edition of its Global Accelerated Action for the Health of Adolescents (AA-HA!) guidance
11 October 2023
Departmental update
WHO releases updated guidance on adolescent health and well-being
18 June 2019
News release
1 in 3 people globally do not have access to safe drinking water – UNICEF, WHO
Publications
All →
23 September 2024
Water, sanitation and hygiene and infection prevention and control measures for infectious diarrhoea...
This operational guide addresses water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), food safety management, and infection prevention and control (IPC) measures that...
Download
Read More
21 August 2024
WHO SEAR 17th Epidemiological Bulletin 2024
This epidemiological bulletin aims to provide the situation of key infectious diseases in the WHO South-East Asia region to inform risk assessments and...
Download
Read More
12 November 2019
Safer water, better health
Ensuring the access of all people to sufficient, safe water and adequate sanitation and encouraging
personal, domestic and community hygiene will improve...
Download
Read More
17 October 2019
Exploratory meeting to review new evidence for Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (‎IMCI)‎ danger...
For children up to 5 years of age with common childhood illnesses, WHO’s IMCI
strategy recommends using clinical signs for diagnosis, treatment...
Download
Read More
Our work
Managing childhood illness
Infographics
Infographic
5 keys to safer food poster
Related highlight
Lower-Dose Zinc for Childhood Diarrhea — A Randomized, Multicenter Trial
Article in New England Journal of Medicine, 24 September 2020
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Child health
Physical environment
Food safety
Populations and demographics
Newborn health
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)