HIV - Global
Skip to main content
Overview
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is an infection that attacks the body’s immune system, specifically the white blood cells called CD4 cells. HIV destroys these CD4 cells, weakening a person’s immunity against opportunistic infections, such
as tuberculosis and fungal infections, severe bacterial infections and some cancers.
WHO recommends that every person who may be at risk of HIV should access testing.
People at increased risk of acquiring HIV
should seek comprehensive and effective HIV prevention, testing and treatment services.
HIV infection can be diagnosed
using simple and affordable rapid diagnostic tests, as well as self-tests. It is important that
HIV testing services
follow the 5Cs: consent, confidentiality, counselling, correct results and connection with treatment and
other services.
People diagnosed with HIV should be offered and linked to
antiretroviral treatment (ART)
as
soon as possible following diagnosis and
periodically monitored
using clinical and laboratory parameters, including the test to measure virus in the blood (viral load). If ART is taken consistently, this treatment also
prevents HIV transmission
to others.
At diagnosis or soon after starting ART, a CD4 cell count should be checked to assess a person’s immune status. The CD4 cell count is a blood test used to assess progression of HIV disease, including risk for developing
opportunistic infections
and guides the use of preventive treatment. The normal range of CD4 count is from 500 to 1500 cells/mm3
of blood, and it progressively decreases over time in persons who are not receiving or not responding well to ART. If the person’s CD4 cell count falls below 200, their immunity is severely compromised, leaving them susceptible to infections
and death. Someone with a CD4 count below 200 is described as having an
advanced HIV disease (AHD)
.
HIV viral load measures the amount of virus in the blood. This test is used to monitor the level of viral replication and effectiveness of ART. The treatment goal is to reduce the viral load in the blood to undetectable levels (less than 50 copies/ml),
and the persistent presence of detectable viral load (greater than 1000 copies/ml) in people living with HIV on ART is an indicator of inadequate treatment response and the need to change or adjust the treatment regimen.
WHO’s 2022–2030
global health sector strategy on HIV
aims
to reduce HIV infections from 1.5 million in 2020 to 335 000 by 2030, and deaths from 680 000 in 2020 to under 240 000 in 2030.
Symptoms
Many people do not feel symptoms of HIV in the first few months after infection and may not know that they are infected. Others may experience influenza-like symptoms, including fever, headache, rash and sore throat. However, these first few months are when the virus is most infectious.
As the disease progresses, symptoms will be expanded and more pronounced. These can include swollen lymph nodes, weight loss, fever, diarrhoea and cough. HIV weakens the body’s ability to fight other infections, and without treatment people will become more susceptible to
other severe illnesses
such as
tuberculosis
, cryptococcal meningitis, bacterial infections and some cancers including lymphomas and Kaposi’s sarcoma.
Diagnosis of HIV
uses rapid tests that provide same-day results and can  be done at home, although a laboratory test is required to confirm the infection. This early identification greatly improves treatment options and reduces the risk of transmission to other people including sexual or drug-sharing partners.
Treatment
HIV is fully preventable. Effective
antiretroviral treatment (ART)
prevents
HIV transmission from mother to child
during pregnancy, delivery and breastfeeding. Someone who is on antiretroviral therapy and virally suppressed will not pass HIV to their sexual partners.
Condoms prevent HIV and other sexually transmitted infections, and prophylaxis use antiretroviral medicines to prevent HIV.
Male circumcision
is recommended in high-burden countries in eastern and southern Africa. Harm reduction (needle syringe programmes and opioid substitution therapy) prevents HIV and other blood-borne infections for
people who inject drugs
.
HIV is treated with antiretroviral therapy consisting of one or more medicines. ART does not cure HIV but reduces its replication in the blood, thereby reducing the viral load to an undetectable level.
ART enables people living with HIV to lead healthy, productive lives. It also works as an effective prevention,
reducing the risk of onward transmission by 96%
.
ART should be taken every day throughout the person’s life. People can continue with
safe and effective ART
if they adhere to their treatment. In cases when ART becomes ineffective -
HIV drug resistance
- due to reasons such as lost contact with health care providers and drug stockouts, people will need to switch to other medicines to protect their health.
Fact sheets
HIV and AIDS
HIV drug resistance
Questions and answers
HIV and AIDS
Guidance on handling interruptions in antiretroviral treatment due to HIV service disruptions, drug shortages, or stockouts
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and people living with HIV
Guidelines
Guidelines on HIV
Country information
Country profiles
HIV testing services dashboard
Databases and tools
HIV data and statistics
Global Health Observatory HIV data repository:
The epidemic
The response
Resolutions and decisions
Global health sector strategies on, respectively, HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, for the period 2022–2030 (WHA75.20)
Global health sector strategies on HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, for the period 2016–2021 (WHA69.22)
Global health sector strategy on HIV/AIDS, 2011–2015 (WHA64.14)
Global health-sector strategy for HIV/AIDS (WHA56.30)
HIV/AIDS: confronting the epidemic (WHA53.14)
Technical work
Global HIV, Hepatitis and STIs Programmes
Vaccine development
News
All →
13 October 2025
News release
Maldives becomes the first country to achieve ‘triple elimination’ of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
12 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO released updated guideline on HIV service delivery
10 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO announces the development of guidelines on multiplex testing
31 July 2025
Departmental update
Redefining the HIV response in Africa through local production of medicines and diagnostics
1 December
World AIDS Day
World AIDS Day brings together people from around the world to raise awareness about HIV/AIDS
Visit the campaign page
→
Feature stories
All →
16 May 2025
Safe spaces for LGBTQ+ people: ending discrimination, saving lives
11 March 2025
Breaking the barriers to access to care for marginalized communities
20 December 2024
Lusophone countries united to eliminate HIV, hepatitis, STIs and TB by 2030
29 November 2024
Rosa’s HIV journey - the transformative power of advocacy and community engagement
Multimedia
All →
Infographic
Invest in Condoms – The cornerstone of prevention for sexually transmitted infections, including HIV
Infographic
Condoms: A Smart, Safe, and Cost-Effective Choice!
Infographic
Condoms protect
against unplanned pregnancy and most sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, gonorrhoea, chlamydia and syphilis.
Infographic
Condoms prevent most sexually transmitted infections, including HIV
2 July 2025
Webinar – WHO operational guidance for sustaining HIV, viral hepatitis and STI priority services in a changing funding landscape
17 March 2025
WHO press conference on global health issues – 17 March 2025
10 March 2025
Transforming WHO: Tackling HIV in challenging times with Dr Meg Doherty
28 November 2024
WHO press conference on global health issues – 28 November 2024
Facts in pictures
18 July 2025
HIV
Apps
Publications
All →
19 November 2025
Integrated drug resistance action framework for HIV, hepatitis B and C and sexually...
The Integrated Drug Resistance Action Framework for HIV, Hepatitis B and C, and Sexually Transmitted Infections (2026–2030) outlines a unified global approach...
Download
Read More
13 October 2025
Opioid agonist maintenance treatment as an essential health service: implementation guidance on mitigating...
Opioid agonist maintenance treatment (OAMT) for people with opioid dependence is proven to be safe and effective in addressing a broad range of health...
Download
Read More
1 September 2025
WHO guideline on HIV service delivery
This WHO guideline recommends integrating services for hypertension, diabetes, and mental health (including depression, anxiety, and substance use) into...
Download
Read More
WHO Youtube Channel
HIV/AIDS - WHO videos playlist
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Hepatitis
Diseases and conditions
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Diseases and conditions
Tuberculosis