Assistive technology
Skip to main content
Overview
Assistive technology enables and promotes inclusion and participation, especially of persons with disability, aging populations, and people with non-communicable diseases. The primary purpose of assistive products is to maintain or improve an individual’s functioning and independence, thereby promoting their well-being. They enable people to live healthy, productive, independent and dignified lives, and to participate in education, the labour market and civic life.
Examples of assistive products include hearing aids, wheelchairs, spectacles, prostheses and devices that support memory, among many others. While supporting independence and well-being, these products can also help to prevent or reduce the effects of secondary health conditions, such as lower limb amputation in people with diabetes. They can also reduce the need and impact on carers and mitigate the need for formal health and support services. Moreover, access to appropriate assistive products can have a tremendous impact on community development and economic growth.
Despite the global need and recognized benefits of assistive products, access to assistive products remains limited. Addressing this unmet need is essential to progress towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and realizing the Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Challenges
Despite the growing number of people in need of assistive products in every country, many do not have the access they require. This is particularly the case in low- and middle-income countries, where access to these life-changing products has been found to be as low as 3%. These gaps exist for several reasons, including high cost and a lack of financing, availability, awareness and trained personnel.
Challenges exist both in low- and high-income countries. Very few countries globally have developed a national assistive technology policy or programme and so provide assistive products through the private sector. Even in high-income countries, assistive products are often rationed or not included within health and welfare schemes, leading to high out-of-pocket payments by users and their families. People may be left to rely on erratic donations or charity services, which often means the products are of low quality or inappropriate for the person’s needs. Those who can afford them often purchase items from pharmacies, private clinics, or workshops. In these scenarios, people often are not taught how to use the product safely and lack access to follow-up appointments, which are essential to ensure that the product meets the person’s needs and that it is in good working order.
WHO response
WHO’s vision is that everyone, everywhere, has the right to the highest attainable standard of health. Assistive technology is fundamental to achieve this vision, as they ensure that people with disabilities, older people and those affected by health conditions are able to live a healthy and dignified life and are included in society.
As part of that commitment, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development places well-being and universal health coverage at the centre of its development vision, with the commitment to leave no one behind. In addition, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has recognized access to assistive technology as a human right and has called for international cooperation to improve global access (Article 32).
In 2018, delegates at the Seventy-first World Health Assembly adopted the resolution Improving access to assistive technology, urging Member States to develop, implement and strengthen policies and programmes to improve access to assistive technology as a move towards universal health coverage.
WHO coordinates the
Global Cooperation on Assistive Technology (GATE)
as a step towards realizing the Sustainable Development Goals, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and implementing the resolution WHA71.8 on assistive technology. The GATE initiative has the goal to support countries in addressing challenges and improving access to assistive products within their context.
Read about the GATE initiative
Join the GATE Community
Fact sheets
Assistive technology
Databases and tools
ATA-toolkit
Assistive technology data portal
Initiatives and groups
Global Cooperation on Assistive Technology (GATE)
Advisory Group of Experts on Assistive Technology
Technical Advisory Group on the Use of Digital Technologies to Enhance Access to Assistive Technology
Resolutions and decisions
Improving access to assistive technology
Improving access to assistive technology in the Eastern Mediterranean Region
Framework for improving access to assistive technology in the WHO African
Region
Training
Training in assistive products
Technical work
Access to assistive technology
Global Report on Assistive Technology
National assistive products lists
Quality wheelchair services
Health product and policy standards
News
All →
23 June 2025
Departmental update
Global leaders call for the integration of assistive technology and rehabilitation in health emergency response
17 May 2025
Departmental update
WHO advances access and equity at the UN Commission on Population and Development
Events
All →
12 December 2025 11:30 – 12:45 UTC Time
Launch of WHO Learning on TAP
9 – 17 June 2025
Assistive Products Priority List (APL) open consultations
Publications
All →
6 October 2025
Improving access to assistive technology in United Republic of Tanzania (2022-2023): project report
The report summarizes a collaboration between the Ministry of Health of the United Republic of Tanzania, HelpAge Tanzania and the World Health Organization...
Download
Read More
5 October 2025
Enabling rapid access to essential assistive technology in Ukraine (2022-2023): project report
This report summarizes a collaboration between the Ministry of Health of Ukraine and the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2022 and 2023. The goal was...
Download
Read More
21 July 2025
Accelerating access to assistive technology: Eastern Mediterranean Regional workshop report, Cairo, Egypt,...
From 3 to 5 December 2024, the World Health Organization (WHO), in collaboration with the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), convened a regional...
Download
Read More
30 June 2025
Access to safe, effective and quality-assured health products and technologies
The roadmap for WHO action 2025–2030 outlines to Member States, and other stakeholders WHO’s unique role and approach for increasing access...
Download
Read More
Our work
Supporting countries to advance health equity for persons with disabilities
Improving access to Assistive Technology
Feature story
2 March 2021
First ever global guide for assistive technology to improve the life of millions
Highlight
Read more about GReAT
Global Report on Assistive Technology
Multimedia
All →
16 September 2024
Sulaiman Mayanja on the importance of accessibility
16 September 2024
Hope Gordon explains the importance of having a good prosthetic that fits well
16 September 2024
Zahra Nemati on why using an efficient wheelchair is vital & how cities can be made more accessible
4 November 2023
WHA71.8 Progress Indicators for Access to Assistive Technology
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Ageing
Conditions
Deafness and hearing loss
Populations and demographics
Disability
Diseases and conditions
Eye care, vision impairment and blindness
Health interventions
Medical devices
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Health systems
Primary health care
Health interventions
Rehabilitation