Adolescent health
Skip to main content
Overview
Adolescence is the phase of life between childhood and adulthood, from ages 10 to 19. It is a unique stage of human development and an important time for laying the foundations of good health.
Adolescents experience rapid physical, cognitive and psychosocial growth. This affects how they feel, think, make decisions, and interact with the world around them.
Despite being thought of as a healthy stage of life, there is significant death, illness and injury in the adolescent years. Much of this is preventable or treatable. During this phase, adolescents establish patterns of behaviour – for instance,
related to diet, physical activity, substance use, and sexual activity – that can protect their health and the health of others around them, or put their health at risk now and in the future.
To grow and develop in good health, adolescents need information, including age-appropriate comprehensive sexuality education; opportunities to develop life skills; health services that are acceptable, equitable, appropriate and effective; and safe and
supportive environments. They also need opportunities to meaningfully participate in the design and delivery of interventions to improve and maintain their health. Expanding such opportunities is key to responding to adolescents’ specific needs
and rights.
Adolescents and youth and COVID-19
Resource bank for adolescent health
Impact
There are more adolescents in the world than ever before: 1.3 billion, totalling one sixth of the global population. This number is expected to rise through 2050, particularly in low- and middle-income countries where close to 90% of 10- to 19-year-olds
live.
An estimated 1.1 million adolescents die each year. The leading causes are road traffic injuries, suicide and interpersonal violence. Millions of adolescents also experience illness and injury. Causes of mortality and morbidity among adolescents differ
by sex and age, and also by geographic region.
For 10-14-year-olds, the leading risks for health are related to water, hygiene and sanitation. Risks for 15-19-year-olds are more often related to behaviours, such as alcohol use and unsafe sex. Poor diet and low physical activity are additional challenges
which begin in childhood and adolescence, as does sexual abuse. Older adolescent girls are disproportionately affected by intimate partner violence. Pregnancy complications and unsafe abortions are the leading causes of death among 15-19-year-old
girls.
Most adolescent mortality and morbidity is preventable or treatable, but adolescents face specific barriers in accessing health information and services. Restrictive laws and policies, parental or partner control, limited knowledge, distance, cost, lack
of confidentiality, and provider bias can all restrict adolescents from getting the care they need to grow and develop in good health.
WHO Response
WHO supports countries to ensure that their national adolescent health responses are evidence-based and take account of the values and preferences of adolescents.
Improving the evidence base on adolescent health is crucial. WHO supports countries to improve measurement and  strengthen data, conducts research, and shares best practice.
WHO issues evidence-based recommendations that are relevant for – or specific to – adolescents across the full range of health areas including: positive development, communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases, sexual and reproductive health including HIV, unintentional injury, violence, and mental health, substance abuse and self-harm.
To support the implementation of these recommendations, WHO produces a range of policy and programme support tools. At the heart is the
Global Accelerated Action for the Health of Adolescents (AA-HA!)
, which guides national-level policy-makers and programme managers on how to plan, implement, monitor, and evaluate adolescent health programmes.
WHO also supports countries to scale up efforts in service delivery, financing and governance, helps to build the capacities of national-level researchers and programmers, and provides technical support for policy and programmes.
Adolescents need protection from harm on the one hand, and support to make independent decisions on the other. They have a key role to play in the response to their own health and wellbeing. WHO's 13th General Programme of Work recognizes this and is committed to working with adolescents as central partners to improve adolescent health.
Fact sheets
Adolescent and young adult health
Mental health of adolescents
Adolescent pregnancy
Youth violence
Endometriosis
Questions and answers
Adolescent sexual and reproductive health
Comprehensive sexuality education
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): Adolescents and youth
Databases and tools
Adolescent birth rate data
Adolescent country profiles
Adolescent data
Global Action for Measurement of Adolescent health (GAMA)
Global School-based Student Health Survey (GSHS)
Health Behaviour in School-aged Children (HBSC)
Technical work
Adolescent and Young Adult Health Unit
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health, and Ageing
Nutrition and Food Safety
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
Violence prevention
News
All →
29 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO and Noora Health begin collaboration to strengthen support for family caregivers
30 June 2025
News release
Social connection linked to improved health and reduced risk of early death
7 April 2025
Departmental update
The multigenerational charge for women’s health and gender equality
23 September 2024
News release
Securing adolescent health and well-being today is vital for the health of future generations - WHO
Latest publications
All →
30 October 2025
Competency and outcomes framework for adolescent health and well-being
This document describes health workers’ competencies and behaviours necessary to advance universal health coverage for the world’s adolescents....
Download
Read More
23 October 2025
Global standards for quality health care services for adolescents
This publication is an updated version of the document published in “2015” under the title “Global standards for quality health-care...
Download
Read More
28 September 2025
Report of the 11th Meeting of the WHO Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts for Maternal,...
This is the report from the 11th meeting (June 10- 12 2025) of the strategic and technical advisory group of experts (STAGE) for maternal newborn child...
Download
Read More
7 September 2025
WHO labour care guide: implementation resource package
The WHO Labour Care Guide advances evidence-based, respectful, and person-centered intrapartum care by strengthening health workers’ capacity for...
Download
Read More
Our work
Setting standards for adolescent care
Strengthening data on adolescent health and well-being
Strengthening adolescent-responsive health systems
Ending TB in children and adolescents
Improving the mental and brain health of children and adolescents
Promoting adolescent well-being
Investing in school health
Feature stories
All →
23 April 2025
Policy and education: ways to end child marriage and prevent adolescent pregnancy
17 April 2025
How young advocates are preventing child marriage and early pregnancy in Nepal
28 March 2025
Donors making a difference to maternal health & newborn health: the urgent drive to save women’s lives across the world
13 August 2024
Strengthening Primary Health Care with a Community Health Strategy in Mozambique
Infographics
All →
Infographic
The way forward on social connection
Infographic
Drivers of social isolation and loneliness
Infographic
Solutions to strengthen social connection
Infographic
Defining social connection, loneliness and social isolation
Videos
All →
3 July 2025
Y Check research program
30 June 2025
The Social Connection Series: Benny's Story
30 June 2025
The Social Connection Series: Macy's Story
30 June 2025
The Social Connection Series: Dave's Story
Podcast
Episode #105 - Growing up informed: sexuality education
Are you a parent, teacher or just someone who cares about sexuality education? Dr Chandra-Mauli Venkataraman answers the important questions on sexuality education in the latest episode of Science in 5. Tune in to learn why it is crucial for our overall health and when, how and by whom it should be provided.
Events
All →
17 – 19 November 2025
12th Online Meeting of the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts (STAGE) for Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Nutrition (MNCAHN)
6 November 2025 11:30 – 12:45 Saudi Arabia Time
Social Connection as a Foundation for Inclusive Development: Implementing the WHO Commission’s Call to Action — WSSDII Solution Session
10 – 12 June 2025
11th Meeting of the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts (STAGE) for Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Nutrition (MNCAHN)
Spotlight
Six actions to improve adolescent health
Related health topics
Behavioural interventions
Health promoting schools
Communicable diseases
HIV
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health