Deafness and hearing loss
Skip to main content
Overview
A person is said to have hearing loss if they are not able to hear as well as someone with normal hearing, meaning hearing thresholds of 20 dB or better in both ears. It can be mild, moderate, moderately severe, severe or profound, and can affect one or both ears. Major causes of hearing loss include congenital or early onset childhood hearing loss, chronic middle ear infections, noise-induced hearing loss, age-related hearing loss, and ototoxic drugs that damage the inner ear.
The impacts of hearing loss are broad and can be profound. They include a loss of the ability to communicate with others delayed language development in children, which can lead to social isolation, loneliness and frustration, particularly among older people with hearing loss. Many areas lack sufficient accommodations for hearing loss, which effect academic performance and options for employment. Children with hearing loss and deafness in developing countries rarely receive any schooling. WHO estimates that unaddressed hearing loss costs the global economy US$ 980 billion annually due to health sector costs (excluding the cost of hearing devices), costs of educational support, loss of productivity and societal costs.
Prevalence
Deafness and hearing loss are widespread and found in every
region and country. Currently
more than 1.5 billion people (nearly 20% of the global population) live with hearing
loss; 430 million of them have disabling hearing loss. It is expected that by
2050, there could be over 700 million people with disabling hearing loss.
Globally, 34 million children have deafness or hearing loss, of
which 60% of cases are due to preventable causes. At the other end of the
lifespan, approximately 30% of people over 60 years of age have hearing loss.
Many of the impacts of hearing loss can be mitigated through
early detection and interventions. These include specialized education programs
and sign language instruction for young children and their families. Assistive
technologies, including hearing aids, cochlear implants, closed captioning and
other devices can help people with hearing loss at any age. People may also
benefit from speech therapy, aural rehabilitation and other related services.
Low- and middle-income countries bear a disproportionate burden
from hearing loss. WHO estimates that global hearing aid production covers just
3% of the need in these countries.
Prevention
WHO estimates that 50% of hearing loss can be prevented through public health measures. Some prevention strategies target individual lifestyle choices such as exposure to loud sounds and music or wearing protective equipment such as earplugs. This can be assisted through implementing audio standards for personal audio systems and devices.
Further reductions in hearing loss can be gained through screening and early interventions in childhood, including application of assistive technologies or surgical options. Screenings can also prevent the use of damaging pharmaceuticals in high-risk cases.
Hearing loss and deafness can also occur as a complication of other diseases such as measles, meningitis, rubella and mumps. Work to prevent these diseases through vaccination and hygiene programs can have a beneficial impact on rates of hearing loss and deafness. Immunizing adolescent girls and women of reproductive age against rubella before pregnancy, and preventing cytomegalovirus infections in pregnant women, can reduce the risk of babies born with congenital hearing loss or deafness.
Fact sheets
Deafness and hearing loss
Make listening safe
Ear care
Age-related hearing loss (presbycusis)
FAQ: Make listening safe
How to be deaf or hard of hearing friendly
Tinnitus
Databases and tools
hearWHO App
Resolutions and decisions
Primary prevention and integrated care for sensory impairments including vision impairment and hearing loss, across the life course (WHA 78.7)
Improving access to assistive technology (WHA 71.8)
Prevention of deafness and hearing loss (WHA70.13)
Prevention of hearing impairment (WHA 48.9)
Technical work
Noncommunicable diseases, rehabilitation and disability
Sensory functions, disability and rehabilitation
News
All →
28 February 2025
Joint News Release
New WHO and ITU standard aims to prevent hearing loss among gamers
17 May 2024
Departmental update
Ireland and WHO work together to improve access to assistive technology globally
1 March 2024
Departmental update
WHO issues guidance to improve access to hearing care in low- and middle-income settings
17 January 2024
Departmental update
Video gamers worldwide may be risking irreversible hearing loss and/or tinnitus
Our work
Promoting the World Hearing Forum
Making listening safe
Advocating for hearing care
Integrating ear and hearing care into health systems
Highlighted publications
Primary ear and hearing care training manual
World Report on Hearing
Latest publications
All →
21 May 2025
Vision and hearing screening for school-age children: implementation handbook
Unaddressed sensory impairments have far-reaching impacts on the lives of thoseaffected and their families. In children, sensory inputs from both vision...
Download
Read More
20 May 2025
Global standard for safe listening video gameplay and esports
This standard supports WHO’s Make Listening Safe initiative, by aiming to improve listening practices for young people during video gameplay and...
Download
Read More
23 February 2024
Hearing aid service delivery approaches for low- and middle-income settings
It is estimated that while more than 400 million people worldwide could benefit from hearing aid use alone, only 17% get to use these devices. This gap...
Download
Read More
2 August 2023
Guidance on the analysis and use of routine health information systems: eye and ear care module
The collection of routine data for eye and ear care from health facility reporting underpins health related decision-making in health policy, management...
Download
Read More
Related content
Hearing loss and the role of health care providers
Events
All →
2026
World Hearing Day 2026: From communities to schools: hearing care for all children
3 March 2026
Strategic planning meeting of WHO network of collaborating centres and organizations in official relations for ear and hearing care
29 January 2026 13:30 – 16:00 CET
World Hearing Day
World Hearing Day
World Hearing Day is held on 3 March each year to raise awareness on how to prevent deafness and hearing loss and promote ear and hearing care across the world.
Photo exhibition
Photo exhibition Changing mindsets is essential to making ear and hearing are accessible
Through this exhibition and related stories, the World Health Organization and the World Hearing Forum draw attention to the positive impact of timely identification and management of ear and hearing problems in order to correct existing misperceptions and change damaging mindsets.
Science in 5 podcast
Episode #93 - Hearing loss
What are the early signs of hearing loss? Can it be cured? What can you do to prevent hearing loss? Dr Shelly Chadha explains in Science in 5.
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Safe listening for video gameplay and esports- Infographic
Infographic
Ear and hearing care - WPRO
Infographic
Ear and hearing care - SEARO
Infographic
Ear and hearing care - EMRO
Videos
All →
3 March 2025
On World Hearing Day WHO calls for access to rehabilitation & affordable hearing devices for all
2 May 2024
Hearing aid service delivery approaches for low- and middle-income settings
29 September 2023
Youth perspectives on safe listening: first dialogue between Terez Lord and Ricky Kej
29 September 2023
Youth perspectives on safe listening: dialogue between Nick Peverett and Ricky Kej
Feature stories
All →
8 October 2024
WHO hearing guidelines implemented at major arts festival
Facts in pictures
All →
1 February 2024
Deafness
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Ageing
Health interventions
Assistive technology
Populations and demographics
Disability
Populations and demographics
Maternal health
Health interventions
Rehabilitation