Meningitis
Skip to main content
Overview
Meningitis is a serious infection of the meninges, the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. It is a devastating disease and remains a major public health challenge. The disease can be caused by many different pathogens including bacteria, fungi or viruses, but the highest global burden is seen with bacterial meningitis.
There are four main causes of acute bacterial meningitis: meningococcus, pneumococcus,
Haemophilus influenzae
and
Streptococcus agalactiae
, also known as Group B streptococcus (GBS). Meningococcus has the most potential to produce outbreaks and large-scale epidemics. The largest burden of meningococcal meningitis occurs in the meningitis belt, an area of sub-Saharan Africa, which stretches from Senegal in the west to Ethiopia in the east.
Meningococcal meningitis can affect anyone of any age. Overall, mortality is highest in children younger than 5 years. The route of transmission varies by organism. Most bacteria that cause meningitis are carried in the human nose and throat. They spread from person to person by respiratory droplets or throat secretions. GBS is often carried in the human gut or vagina and can spread from mother to child around the time of birth. Carriage of these organisms is usually harmless and helps build up immunity against infection, but the bacteria occasionally invade the body causing meningitis and sepsis.
Symptoms
The symptoms of meningitis can differ based on the cause, how quickly the disease progresses, how long it lasts, brain involvement, and other serious complications like sepsis. Less frequent symptoms include seizures, coma, and neurological deficits, such as weakness of the limbs. Infants often have different symptoms compared to adults, such as unusual behaviour; irritability; weak, continuous cry; poor feeding, and bulging of the soft spot in their head.
Some bacterial pathogens may also account for other symptoms as a result of bloodstream infection, which can quickly lead to sepsis, including cold hands and feet, fast breathing, and low blood pressure. A characteristic, non-blanching skin rash may appear with meningococcal sepsis.
Treatment
Meningitis is a medical emergency and requires urgent medical attention. Antibiotic treatment should be started as soon as possible when bacterial meningitis is suspected. The first dose of antibiotic treatment should not be delayed until the results of the lumbar puncture are available. In non-epidemic settings, intravenous corticosteroids are initiated with the first dose of antibiotics, in order to reduce the inflammatory response and the risk of neurological sequelae and death.
If treatment is started prior to the lumbar puncture, it may be difficult to grow the bacteria from the spinal fluid and confirm the diagnosis. However, confirmation of the diagnosis should not delay treatment.
Vaccines against
meningococcal
, pneumococcal and
Haemophilus influenzae
disease have been available for many years. These bacteria have several different strains and vaccines are designed to protect against the most harmful ones. No universal vaccine exists. Vaccines against GBS are in development.
Intravenous penicillin can be administered to mothers at risk of transmitting GBS to their babies during labour, to prevent their babies developing GBS infection. Post-exposure prophylaxis with antibiotics is given to close contacts of individuals with meningococcal disease to eradicate asymptomatic meningococcal carriage in the nose and decrease the risk of transmission.
Fact sheets
Meningitis
Databases and tools
Global Health Observatory data on meningitis
Disease outbreak news
Latest disease outbreak news
Meningitis weekly bulletins
The Weekly Epidemiological Record (WER)
Initiatives and groups
Defeating meningitis by 2030
International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision for meningitis
Training
Meningitis: Introduction
Public health interventions in pandemics and epidemics
Pandemic and epidemic-prone diseases
Training for outbreaks
Technical work
Disease outbreaks
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
Pneumococcal Disease
News
All →
14 October 2025
News release
11 million lives lost each year: urgent action needed on neurological care
10 April 2025
News release
WHO launches first-ever guidelines on meningitis diagnosis, treatment and care
17 October 2024
Departmental update
World Meningitis Day: a call to action against a global threat
26 April 2024
Joint News Release
WHO and France convene high-level meeting to defeat meningitis
Publications
All →
26 September 2025
Regional Implementation Framework to defeat meningitis in South-East Asia by 2030
The “Regional Implementation Framework to defeat meningitis in South-East (SE) Asia by 2030 (SEA RIF-DM2030)” is a strategic initiative led...
Download
Read More
2 September 2025
Standard case definitions of acute bacterial meningitis and invasive meningococcal disease for routine...
Acute bacterial meningitis and invasive meningococcal disease are global public health threats that require sustained control efforts. Under the framework...
Download
Read More
10 April 2025
WHO guidelines on meningitis diagnosis, treatment and care
In line with the Defeating meningitis by 2030: a global road map, the WHO guidelines on meningitis diagnosis, treatment and care provide evidence-based...
Download
Read More
8 December 2024
WHO recommendations for management of serious bacterial infections in infants aged 0–59 days
The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed guidelines for the management of infants aged 0-59 days with serious bacterial infections (sepsis, meningitis,...
Download
Read More
Our work
Ensuring effective meningitis surveillance
Improving meningitis diagnosis at all levels of health care
Preventing and controlling meningitis outbreaks
Preparing and preventing epidemics and pandemics
Feature stories
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
6 May 2024
Donors making a difference: CERF helps WHO deliver on its pledge for one billion more people better protected from health emergencies
5 October 2023
A new vaccine will change the balance of the fight against meningitis
Campaigns
World Immunization Week
24 to 30 April
Read more
WHO
Immunization settlement child
©
Credits
Related health topics
Health and wellbeing
Brain health
Socio-political determinants
International Health Regulations
Other
Universal health coverage
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization