Nursing and Midwifery
Skip to main content
Overview
Nursing encompasses autonomous and collaborative care of individuals of all ages, families, groups and communities, sick or well and in all settings. It includes the promotion of health, the prevention of illness, and the care of ill, disabled and dying people. Nurses play a critical role in health care and are often the unsung heroes in health care facilities and emergency response. They are often the first to detect health emergencies and work on the front lines of disease prevention and the delivery of primary health care, including promotion, prevention, treatment and rehabilitation.
In many countries, nurses make up half of all health care professionals and have a vital role in how health actions are organized and applied, both at the front-line and managerial levels.  They are often the first and sometimes only health professional a patient will see and the quality of their initial assessment and subsequent care is vital to strong health outcomes.
Impact
Despite the critical role they play in health care, there is a shortage of nurses worldwide that is expected to rise as the population grows. Initiatives to expand health care services, particularly in low- and middle-income countries, are succeeding in providing access to previously underserved communities, which furthers the need for trained nurses. Every country needs a competent, motivated, well-distributed and supported health workforce as part of the global drive for universal health coverage, and nurses are central to these efforts.
Nurses and midwives account for nearly 50% of the global health workforce. However, they also represent 50% of the global shortage of health workers, which is estimated at 4 million. Since in most countries nurses and midwives form the bulk
of the clinical health workforce, developing and strengthening human resources for health means recognizing that nursing and midwifery services play a vital role in improving health service delivery. Nursing also represents a significant share of
the female workforce; globally, 70% of health and social workers are women. Achieving the goal of health care for all will require huge efforts to reduce the shortage of health workers around the world.
WHO response
WHO recognizes the vital role that nurses play in primary
health care delivery worldwide – including research, disease prevention,
treating the injured, palliative care and more – which is represented through
several World Health Assembly resolutions. These documents demonstrate the
importance WHO Member States attach to nursing and midwifery services as a
means of achieving better health for all communities.
Nursing and Midwifery at WHO is led by the Chief Nursing Officer (CNO), Dr Amelia Latu Afuhaamango Tuipulotu, from the Kingdom of Tonga. She was appointed to the role in December 2022, taking over from Elizabeth Iro, the first Chief Nursing Officer at WHO, who held the position from 2017-2022. A key role of the Office is to provide leadership to nurses and midwives worldwide.
Through the Department of Human Resources for Health (HRH), WHO works on many fronts to promote the role of nurses in health care delivery and expand the global health work force. The Department aims to facilitate the integration of nursing and midwifery services into other WHO programmes and provide evidence-based information on the global health workforce to assist countries and partners in collaborate efforts. WHO also supports technical efforts for capacity building at both the policy level and through in-country programmes, and works to forge networks and effective partnerships to help meet the global need for health care workers.
Fact sheets
Nursing and midwifery
Guidelines
Transforming and scaling up health professionals’ education and training - WHO Education Guidelines 2013
Databases
Consortium of universities for global health
World Directory of Medical Schools
WHO resolutions
WHA64.7 Strengthening nursing and midwifery
WHA66.23 Transforming health workforce education in support of universal health coverage
WHA69.19 Global strategy on human resources for health: workforce 2030
WHA45.5  Strengthening nursing and midwifery in support of strategies for health for all
WHO team
Health workforce
Office of the Chief Nurse
Maternal health
Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Ageing
Department of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
News
All →
30 October 2025
Departmental update
Launch of online learning course on using the IARC Atlas of Breast Cancer Early Detection
25 October 2025
Departmental update
Weaving health through learning: WHO Academy brings Pacific Open Learning Health Net back online
17 October 2025
Departmental update
Empowering countries to harness digital health for stronger health systems
9 October 2025
Feature story
Learner spotlight: Emmanuel’s mental health mission in the Philippines
Latest publications
All →
31 October 2025
Regional Meeting to Accelerate Progress Toward UHC and SDG Goals Through Nursing and Midwifery Strategy...
A robust health workforce is vital for delivering high-quality health services and achieving global health targets. Currently, over half of the health...
Download
Read More
7 October 2025
WHO Academy quality standards: leading lifelong learning for a healthier world
The WHO Academy serves as a transformative force in global health education, dedicated to empowering health professionals, policymakers, and public health...
Download
Read More
5 October 2025
Consolidated guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
Despite the existence of proven interventions for preventing, diagnosing and treating postpartum haemorrhage (PPH), effective implementation of evidence-based...
Download
Read More
5 October 2025
Bleeding after birth: course on prevention, diagnosis and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
The Bleeding after birth training course aims to translate standards into care. It incorporates the latest WHO recommendations related to PPH and includes...
Download
Read More
Our work
Value gender and equity in the global health workforce
Strengthening national emergency preparedness
Building a skilled workforce to prepare for and respond to emergencies
Strengthening quality midwifery for all mothers and newborns
Addressing the international migration of health workers
Improving care of the injured
Strengthening the nursing and midwifery agenda globally
Feature stories
All →
22 September 2025
Transforming abortion care starts with education
Global partners unite to strengthen collaboration and build a skilled, respectful rights-based health workforce
28 March 2025
Donors making a difference to maternal health & newborn health: the urgent drive to save women’s lives across the world
28 February 2025
Donors making a difference: community engagement to promote, provide and protect the health and well-being of all
16 January 2025
South-to-north learning exchanges enhance midwives’ skills in abortion care
Showing the power of global partnerships and collaboration, midwives from Rwanda shared their skills and knowledge of comprehensive abortion care, as part of a new south-to-north l ...
Infographics
All →
Infographic
A midwife's impact lasts for life
Infographic
Women must be actively involved in decisions about pregnancy, childbirth and their health
Infographic
How midwives can support you through pregnancy and beyond
Infographic
More than one-third of women experience long-term health problems after childbirth
Videos
All →
15 October 2025
Lifelong learning that saves lives: inside the WHO Academy’s simulation-based training
12 May 2025
State of the world's nursing report 2025: official global launch
12 May 2025
Urgent need for investment in nursing to drive health - International Nurses Day 2025
11 May 2025
International Nurses Day 2025: World Health Professions Alliance greeting
Events
All →
27 November 2025 18:30 – 20:30 CET
The WHO Academy is opening its doors for a screening and talk around noma, a neglected disease
24 November 2025 12:00 – 13:00 CET
Preventing and managing maternal sepsis
12 – 13 November 2025
Fourth Meeting of the Expert Advisory Group on the WHO Global Code
Related health topics
Health systems
Health systems governance
Health systems
Health workforce
Health systems
Primary health care