Food fortification
Skip to main content
Overview
Fortification is the practice of deliberately increasing the content of one or more micronutrients (i.e., vitamins and minerals) in a food or condiment to improve the nutritional quality of the food supply and provide a public health benefit with minimal risk to health. As well as increasing the nutritional content of staple foods, the addition of micronutrients can help to restore the micronutrient content lost during processing.
Fortification is an evidence-informed intervention that contributes to the prevention, reduction and control of micronutrient deficiencies. It can be used to correct a demonstrated micronutrient deficiency in the general population (mass or large-scale fortification) or in specific population groups (targeted fortification) such as children, pregnant women and the beneficiaries of social protection programmes. When the vitamins and minerals are not added to the foods during the processing but just before consumption at home or at schools or child‐care facilities, it is called point-of-use fortification.
In addition to the micronutrient deficiencies, policies and implementation programmes for fortification need to consider an alignment with policies for the reduction of diet-related noncommunicable diseases. Such is the case of salt iodization, which builds on sodium consumption and, as result, needs to consider strategies for sodium intake reduction.
Recommendations
The World Health Organization recommends large scale food fortification as a powerful evidence-informed and cost-effective intervention to fight vitamin and mineral deficiencies, including iodine deficiency disorders, anaemia and iron deficiency, among
others.
Recommendations in all settings include:
universal salt iodization
fortification of maize flour, corn meal, wheat flour and rice with vitamins and minerals.
For children living in different settings:
micronutrient powders containing iron for point-of-use fortification of foods for infants and young children 6–23 months old or children 2–12 years.
Mandatory food fortification occurs when governments legally oblige food producers to fortify particular foods or categories of foods with specified micronutrients, providing high certainty over time that they will contain a predetermined amount. Voluntary
fortification occurs when a food manufacturer freely chooses to fortify particular foods in response to permission given in food law as a means to increase their brand value.
Globally, mandatory regulations are most often applied to the fortification of food with micronutrients such as iodine, iron, vitamin A and folic acid. Of these, the iodization of salt is the most widely implemented globally.
WHO response
WHO has been working systematically in food fortification for decades and collaborates with different networks for fortification at regional, country and community levels.
WHO, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Codex Alimentarius Commission developed the general principles for the addition of essential nutrients to foods with the intention to provide guidance and protect health, while supporting implementation among Member States.
WHO has organized and convened guideline development group meetings, technical consultations and working groups and has created implementation and monitoring tools in collaboration with country offices and external partners to help Member States to adapt and adopt WHO guidelines and technical documents on food fortification.
WHO also monitors and reports progress of several nutrition targets that are affected by fortification such as the reduction of anaemia in women and the reduction of stunting in children under 5 years of age.
Fact sheets
Malnutrition
Healthy diet
Sodium reduction
Infant and young child feeding
Questions and answers
Food fortification
What is malnutrition?
Databases and tools
eCatalogue of indicators for micronutrient program
e-Library of evidence for Nutrition Actions (eLENA)
Global Database on the implementation of nutrition actions (GINA)
FAO/WHO Global Individual Food Consumption Data Tool (GIFT)
WHO Micronutrients Database
Initiatives and groups
Food Systems for Health
UN Decade of Action on Nutrition
Resolutions and decisions
A/RE/72/306 Implementation of the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016-2025)
Resolutions adopted by UN General Assembly,
24 July 2018
A/72/829 Implementation of the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016-2025)
Report of the Secretary-General, 11 April 2018
WHA71.9 Infant and young child feeding
WHA69 Rev 1 Maternal, infant and young child nutrition
WHA68.19 Outcome of the Second International Conference on Nutrition
WHA60.21 Sustaining the elimination of iodine deficiency disorders
WHA45.33 National strategies for prevention and control of micronutrient malnutrition
WHA37.18 Prevention and control of vitamin A deficiency and xerophthalmia
Technical work
Nutrition and Food Safety
News
All →
29 May 2023
Departmental update
New WHA resolution to accelerate efforts on food micronutrient fortification
23 September 2021
Departmental update
New coalitions announced at the UN Food Systems Summit to increase access to healthy diets from sustainable food systems
13 September 2021
Departmental update
Monitoring flour fortification to maximize health benefits: a manual for millers, regulators, and programme managers
15 October 2020
Departmental update
New electronic survey manual supports countries to combat micronutrient deficiencies
Our work
Developing nutrition guidelines
Establishing global nutrient requirements
Reducing population sodium/salt intake
Strengthening national food control systems
Events
All →
Launch of WHO guideline on fortification of edible oils and fats with vitamins A and D for public health
17 November 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
COP28 Tackling micronutrient malnutrition in a warming world
10 December 2023 15:15 – 16:30 United Arab Emirates Time
Using Digital Technologies in Food Fortification for Improved Nutrition Outcomes
19 – 20 September 2022
Podcast
Episode #94 - Are you consuming too much salt?
WHO’s latest report is urging everyone to reduce salt in our diet. What happens when we consume too much salt? How would we know if we are consuming too much salt and what can we do to reduce it? WHO’s Dr Francesco Branca explains in Science in 5.
Publicatons
All →
24 October 2025
WHO guideline on fortification of edible oils and fats with vitamins A and D for public health
Vitamin A deficiency remains a leading cause of preventable blindness in children and also increases the risks of severe illness or death from infections....
Download
Read More
24 September 2025
Infant and young child feeding: model chapter for textbooks for medical students and allied health professionals,...
The Model
Chapter, which was first published in 2009, brings together essential knowledge
about infant and young child feeding that health professionals...
Download
Read More
17 April 2024
WHO global sodium benchmarks for different food categories, 2nd ed
The World Health Organization (WHO) has established the second edition of the global benchmarks for sodium levels in 70 food subcategories as part of WHO’s...
Download
Read More
3 June 2022
Guideline: fortification of wheat flour with vitamins and minerals as a public health strategy
This guideline provides locally adaptable, clear, evidence-informed global recommendations on the fortification of wheat flour with vitamins and minerals...
Download
Read More
Commentary
25 October 2017
Malnutrition: It’s about more than hunger
Feature story
30 May 2019
Tackling childhood anaemia in indigenous communities in Peru
Multimedia
All →
4 March 2024
WHO's department of nutrition and food safety: key achievements 2023
18 August 2021
Healthier diets through marketing regulations of unhealthy options for children
18 August 2021
Healthier diets through vitamins and minerals additions
18 August 2021
Healthier diets through detailed and accurate nutrition labelling
Related health topics
Substances
Micronutrients
Human behaviour
Nutrition