Stillbirth
Skip to main content
Overview
A baby who dies after 28 weeks of pregnancy, but before or during birth, is classified as a stillbirth.
There are nearly 2 million stillbirths every year – one every 16 seconds. Over 40% of all stillbirths occur during labour – a loss that could be avoided with improved quality and respectful care during childbirth including routine monitoring and timely access to emergency obstetric care when required.
Experiencing a stillbirth during pregnancy or childbirth is a tragedy insufficiently addressed in global agendas, policies and funded programmes. There are psychological costs, especially to women and their families, such as maternal depression, financial consequences and economic repercussions, as well as stigma and taboo.
In 2014, the World Health Assembly endorsed the Every Newborn Action Plan (ENAP), which includes a global target of 12 or fewer third trimester (late) stillbirths per 1,000 total births in every country by 2030. In 2021, 139 mainly high-income and upper middle-income countries had met this target, but 56 countries will not each the ENAP target by 2030 if further efforts are not made. If current trends continue, 15.9 million babies will be stillborn; nearly half of these (7.7 million, 48%) will occur in sub-Saharan Africa.
Causes
With quality health care throughout pregnancy and childbirth, most stillbirths are preventable.
The major causes of stillbirth include pregnancy and childbirth-related complications, prolonged pregnancy, maternal infections such as malaria, syphilis and HIV, maternal conditions especially hypertension, and diabetes, and fetal growth restriction (when an unborn baby is unable to achieve its growth potential and therefore smaller than it should be). Congenital abnormalities are responsible for less than 10% of stillbirths reported nationally in high-income countries and the exact proportion in low-income settings is unknown due to limitations in diagnostics. Factors related to age of the mother and practicing smoking can also increase the risk of maternal disease and stillbirth.
Stillbirths can be prevented through family planning to avoid unwanted pregnancies, good health and nutrition prior to and during pregnancy, quality and respectful antenatal and childbirth care including adequate skilled health personnel including midwives.
Syphilis treatment in pregnancy could also prevent an estimated 200 000 stillbirths, while fetal heart rate monitoring and labour surveillance and prompt interventions when needed are crucial for preventing 832 000 intrapartum stillbirths and reducing neonatal deaths.
Stillbirths are strongly linked to adverse social and economic determinants of health. Prevention and responsive care need to be integrated across the continuum of maternal health care, and beyond. This includes respectful and supportive care in the event of a death.
Listening to the experiences and voices of women and their communities is essential to help address issues of stigma associated with stillbirth.
WHO response
More needs to be done to integrate stillbirth prevention within global and national agendas for high quality health care for women, adolescents, and babies.
Through the Global Strategy for Women's, Children's and Adolescents Health 2016–2030 and implementing the recommendations of the
Every Newborn Action Plan
(2014), WHO is working to end preventable stillbirths, as part of efforts to improve maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health.
Most stillbirths do not receive a birth certificate and are not registered. Improving systems for reporting births and neonatal deaths is a matter of human rights and a prerequisite for reducing stillbirths. In addition, there is a need to strengthen routine health information systems to accurately capture and report stillbirths for monitoring and improving the quality of care.
WHO provides tools to help countries improve their data on both stillbirths and neonatal deaths. WHO also has guidance to help countries review and investigate individual deaths so they can recommend and implement solutions to prevent similar ones in the future and a standard classification system for perinatal deaths (ICD-PM).
WHO and UNICEF are supporting a call for collective action to end preventable stillbirths by:
increasing awareness and reducing stigma
supporting bereaved women and families
strengthening health systems to provide high-quality care
nationalizing and localizing stillbirth targets
improving measurement of stillbirths to enhance evidence and knowledge.
Fact sheets
Maternal mortality
Newborns: improving survival and well-being
Databases and tools
Maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health data portal
Technical work
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research
Maternal, Newborn, Child, Adolescent health and Ageing department
News
All →
30 May 2024
Departmental update
Countries commit to recover lost progress in maternal, newborn & child survival
5 June 2023
Departmental update
Immediate kangaroo mother care reduces risk of sepsis for babies born early or small
9 May 2023
News release
152 million babies born preterm in the last decade
Spotlight
Why we need to talk about losing a baby
Our work
Prioritizing quality of care in maternal health
Making childbirth a positive experience
Promoting healthy pregnancy
Identifying common areas of progress with the Every Newborn Action Plan
Addressing critical knowledge gaps in newborn health
Robust monitoring of maternal health data
Strengthening quality midwifery for all mothers and newborns
Feature stories
All →
28 March 2025
Donors making a difference to maternal health & newborn health: the urgent drive to save women’s lives across the world
17 February 2017
10 Ways to improve the quality of care in health facilities
19 January 2016
Namibia: Maternity waiting homes protect newborns and mothers
Events
All →
Webinar: Understanding why women and babies die to ACT on the evidence
19 February 2025 14:00 – 15:00 CET
WHO at the 33rd International Confederation of Midwives Triennial Congress
11 – 14 June 2023
Highlighted publication
5 December 2018
The Global Strategy for Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ Health (2016-2030)
Early childhood development Report by the Director-General
Download
Read More
Latest publications
All →
15 October 2024
Transitioning to midwifery models of care: global position paper
The “Transitioning to Midwifery Models of Care: Global Position Paper” is a comprehensive document produced by the World Health Organization...
Download
Read More
9 May 2023
Improving maternal and newborn health and survival and reducing stillbirth - Progress report 2023
Improving maternal and newborn health and survival and reducing stillbirth highlights global progress on maternal mortality, neonatal mortality and stillbirths,...
Download
Read More
12 October 2022
Key points for considering adoption of the WHO labour care guide: policy brief
To improve the quality of care during labour and childbirth,
facilitate effective implementation of the World Health
Organization (WHO) recommendations:...
Download
Read More
11 November 2021
Maternal and perinatal death and surveillance and response
The purpose of the new WHO document “Maternal and Perinatal Death Surveillance and Response (MPDSR): materials to support implementation” is...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Inequalities across borders and within countries threaten newborn health
Infographic
Every 7 seconds, a woman or newborn dies, or a baby is lost to stillbirth
Infographic
Stillbirth is an enormous yet overlooked tragedy
Infographic
Without urgent action, more than 19 MILLION BABIES will be stillborn in the next decade
Related health topics
Health interventions
Abortion
Health interventions
Contraception
Populations and demographics
Maternal health
Health systems
Nursing and midwifery
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health