Floods
Skip to main content
Overview
Floods are the most frequent type of natural disaster and occur when an overflow of water submerges land that is usually dry. Floods are often caused by heavy rainfall, rapid snowmelt or a storm surge from a tropical cyclone or tsunami in coastal areas.
Floods can cause widespread devastation, resulting in loss of life and damages to personal property and critical public health infrastructure. Between 1998-2017, floods affected more than 2 billion people worldwide. People who live in floodplains or non-resistant buildings, or lack warning systems and awareness of flooding hazard, are most vulnerable to floods.
There are 3 common types of floods:
Flash floods are caused by rapid and excessive rainfall that raises water heights quickly, and rivers, streams, channels or roads may be overtaken.
River floods are caused when consistent rain or snow melt forces a river to exceed capacity.
Coastal floods are caused by storm surges associated with tropical cyclones and tsunami.
Between 80-90% of all documented disasters from natural hazards during the past 10 years have resulted from floods, droughts, tropical cyclones, heat waves and severe storms. Floods are also increasing in frequency and intensity, and the frequency and intensity of extreme precipitation is expected to continue to increase due to climate change.
Impact
Drowning accounts for 75% of deaths in flood disasters. Flood disasters are becoming more frequent and this trend is expected to continue. Drowning risks increase with floods particularly in low- and middle-income countries where people live in flood prone areas and the ability to warn, evacuate, or protect communities from floods is weak or only just developing.
Deaths also result from physical trauma, heart attacks, electrocution, carbon monoxide poisoning or fire associated with flooding. Often, only immediate traumatic deaths from flooding are recorded.
Floods can also have medium- and long-term health impacts, including:
water- and vector-borne diseases, such as cholera, typhoid or malaria
injuries, such as lacerations or punctures from evacuations and disaster cleanup
chemical hazards
mental health effects associated with emergency situations
disrupted health systems, facilities and services, leaving communities without access to health care
damaged basic infrastructure, such as food and water supplies, and safe shelter.
WHO Response
The magnitude of the physical and human costs from floods can be reduced if adequate emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery measures are implemented in a sustainable and timely manner.
WHO works with Member States to build resilient and proactive health systems that can anticipate the needs and challenges during emergencies so that they are more likely to reduce risks and respond effectively when needed.
As the health cluster lead for global emergencies, WHO works with partners to respond to:
ensure appropriate food supplementation
restore primary care services, like immunization, child and maternal health, and mental health
assemble mobile health teams and outreach
conduct epidemic surveillance, early warning and response
call for emergency funding to support health action.
Fact sheets
Drowning
Typhoid
Cholera
Malaria
Snakebite envenoming
Questions and answers
WHO's role in Humanitarian Health Action
How do I protect myself in a flood?
Databases and tools
Disaster statistics - UNDRR
Disease outbreak news
Latest DONs
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 64.10 Strengthening national health emergency and disaster management capacities and resilience of health systems
Technical work
Health Emergencies Programme
Environment, Climate Change and Health
News
All →
17 September 2022
Statement
WHO Director-General's statement on Pakistan – 17 September 2022
8 November 2019
News release
WHO aids flood-hit populations across Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean Region
9 May 2019
News release
Iran floods leave people with limited access to life-saving health services
Our work
Managing environmental health risks in emergencies
Publications
All →
30 January 2024
Floods: four tips to reduce food safety risks
After a flood, food that has been in contact with flood-water may have become unsafe for human consumption. These flyers include tips to reduce food safety...
Download
Read More
29 April 2020
Preparedness for cyclones, tropical storms, tornadoes, floods and earthquakes during the COVID-19 pandemic
The
WHO health advisory provides guidance to countries on adapting all existing
preparedness and response plans and procedures for natural hazards such...
Download
Read More
1 January 2018
Chemical releases associated with floods
This leaflet provides brief information about Natech and other
chemical releases caused directly or indirectly by floods. It is an
extract from the WHO...
Download
Read More
1 May 2017
Preventing drowning: an implementation guide
This guide provides practical steps to reduce drowning – one of the world’s most preventable, neglected and pressing public health issues....
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Food safety tips for flooding
Infographic
Health tips after floods
Videos
All →
4 October 2022
How is WHO supporting people affected by the floods in Pakistan?
4 October 2022
Devastating floods in Pakistan affect access to health care
Feature stories
All →
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
28 February 2025
Donors making a difference: community engagement to promote, provide and protect the health and well-being of all
24 July 2024
﻿Donors making a difference: Japan supports WHO’s work to improve health services and emergency response
12 July 2024
Donors making a difference for WHO’s work to save lives in Sudan and South Sudan
Related health topics
Disasters
Climate change
Injuries
Drowning