Typhoid
Skip to main content
Overview
Typhoid fever is a life-threatening systemic infection caused by the bacterium
Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhi (commonly known as
Salmonella
Typhi). Typhoid is usually spread through the ingestion of contaminated food or water.
Typhoid occurs predominantly in association with poor sanitation and lack of clean drinking water, in both urban and rural settings. However, urbanization, with associated overcrowded populations and inadequate water and sanitation systems, as well as climate change have the potential to further increase the global burden of typhoid. In addition, increasing antibiotic resistance is making it easier for typhoid to spread and more difficult to be treated.
An estimated 9 million people get sick from typhoid and 110 000 people die from it worldwide every year (2019 figures). Children and populations lacking access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation are at highest risk.
Travellers are at risk of developing typhoid fever in many typhoid endemic countries, particularly in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Elsewhere, travellers are usually at risk when exposed to low standards of personal hygiene or food hygiene and poor water quality.
Even vaccinated travellers should take care to avoid consumption of potentially contaminated food and water as vaccination does not confer 100% protection.
Symptoms and treatment
Salmonella
Typhi lives only in humans. In persons with typhoid fever the bacteria enter through the intestinal tract and eventually invade the bloodstream. The resulting illness is often clinically non-distinguishable from other febrile illnesses. Symptoms include:
prolonged high fever
fatigue
headache
nausea
abdominal pain
constipation or diarrhoea
rash, in some cases.
Severe cases may lead to serious complications or even death.
Typhoid fever can be treated with antibiotics. However, increased resistance to antibiotics, including fluoroquinolones and newer antibiotics such as cephalosporins and azithromycin, as well as the emergence of extensively drug resistant strains of
Salmonella
Typhi leads to more complicated and expensive treatment options in the most affected regions.
Even after symptoms pass, approximately 2–5% of cases become chronic carriers and inadvertently spread typhoid through ongoing faecal shedding of the bacteria and contamination. It is important for people being treated for typhoid fever to do the following:
take prescribed antibiotics for      the full prescribed course;
wash their hands with soap and      water after using the bathroom, and avoid preparing or serving food to      other people, whilst the infection persists; and
have their doctor test (after      the antibiotic course) to ensure that no
Salmonella
Typhi bacteria remain in their body.
Prevention and control
Access to safe water and adequate sanitation, health education, appropriate hygiene among food handlers, and typhoid vaccination are all effective strategies for prevention and control of typhoid.
There are three recommended typhoid vaccines :
typhoid conjugate vaccine, an injectable vaccine for children from 6 months of age and adults up to 65 years;
unconjugated Vi polysaccharide vaccine, an injectable vaccine for people over 2 years; and
live attenuated oral vaccine, suitable for people over the age of 6 years.
Typhoid conjugate vaccine has been recommended for routine use as a single dose in childhood immunization programmes since October 2017. The latter two vaccines have been used for many years in older children and adults at risk of typhoid, including travellers; they do not provide long-lasting immunity and require multiple doses to maintain protection.
Since December 2017, WHO has prequalified two typhoid conjugate vaccines, which are prioritized for introduction in endemic countries with high burden of typhoid or high levels of antimicrobial resistance. Widespread use of the conjugate vaccine in priority countries is expected to help reduce the frequent use of antibiotics for typhoid treatment and slow the increase in antibiotic resistance in
Salmonella
Typhi
.
Fact sheets
Typhoid
Drinking-water
Sanitation
Food safety
Diarrhoeal disease
Technical work
Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals
News
All →
18 June 2019
News release
1 in 3 people globally do not have access to safe drinking water – UNICEF, WHO
3 April 2018
Departmental update
WHO recommends use of first typhoid conjugate vaccine
3 January 2018
Departmental update
Typhoid vaccine prequalified
3 December 2015
News release
WHO’s first ever global estimates of foodborne diseases find children under 5 account for almost one third of deaths
Publications
All →
1 January 2020
Target product profile for therapy of uncomplicated enteric fever
Download
Read More
24 January 2019
Weekly Epidemiological Record, 25 January 2019, vol. 94, 4 - Global Vaccine Safety meeting: Safety of...
GACVS previously reviewed the safety of typhoid vaccines, including the newer generation of typhoid conjugate vaccines (TCVs), in December 2016.3 The...
Download
Read More
8 October 2018
Surveillance standards for vaccine-preventable diseases, 2nd edition
The purpose of this document is to provide World Health Organization (WHO)-recommended standards for conducting surveillance for vaccine preventable diseases...
Download
Read More
30 March 2018
Typhoid vaccines: WHO position paper - March 2018
In accordance with its mandate to provide guidance to Member States on health policy matters, WHO issues a series of regularly updated position papers...
Download
Read More
Meeting reports
All →
4 September 2018
Typhoid: Vaccine Preventable Diseases Surveillance Standards
Typhoid: Vaccine Preventable Diseases Surveillance Standards
21 November 2025
WHO Rapid Risk Assessment - Diphtheria, African Region v.1
WHO Rapid Risk Assessment - Diphtheria, African Region v.1
21 November 2025
Guidelines on the replacement or removal of animal tests
for the quality control of biological products
Guidelines on the replacement or removal of animal tests
for the quality control of biological products
Events
All →
World Immunization week
24 - 30 April
Related links
WHO Guidance on Co-Administration of Typhoid Vaccine with Measles-containing vaccines
Presentation: Summary of key points - WHO position paper on typhoid (2018)
Guidelines on the quality, safety and efficacy of typhoid conjugate vaccines
The Coalition against Typhoid (CaT)
Typhoid Vaccine Acceleration Consortium (TyVAC)
Gavi support for TCV
Related health topics
Physical environment
Food safety
Emergencies