Lymphatic filariasis (Elephantiasis)
Skip to main content
Overview
Lymphatic filariasis, commonly known as elephantiasis, is a painful and profoundly disfiguring disease. It is caused by infection with parasites classified as nematodes (roundworms) of the family Filariodidea that are transmitted through the bites of infected mosquitos. Mosquito-transmitted larvae are deposited on the skin from where they can enter the body. The larvae then migrate to the lymphatic vessels where they develop into adult worms, thus continuing a cycle of transmission.
In communities where filariasis is transmitted, all ages are affected. While the infection may be acquired during childhood its visible manifestations such as limbs oedema may occur later in life, causing temporary or permanent disability. In endemic countries, lymphatic filariasis has a major social and economic impact.
Lymphatic filariasis affects over 120 million people in 72 countries throughout the tropics and sub-tropics of Asia, Africa, the Western Pacific, and parts of the Caribbean and South America.
Symptoms
Whereas the disease was once thought to affect only adults, it now appears that most infections are acquired in childhood. Initial infection is followed by a long period of subclinical disease, which progresses in later life to clinically manifest disease.
Lymphatic filariasis can cause of variety of clinical manifestations, that can be grouped in three categories: acute attacks, lymphoedema/elephantiasis and hydrocoele.
The adult filarial worms cause inflammation of the lymphatic system leading to lymphatic vessel damage, even in asymptomatic people, and lymphatic dysfunction, which predispose the lower limbs in particular to recurrent bacterial infection. These secondary
infections provoke “acute attacks”, which are the commonest symptom of lymphatic filariasis and play an important role in the progression of lymphoedema. Acute attack is usually associated with local pain and swelling and with fever and
chills.
Lymphoedema and its more advanced form, elephantiasis, occur primarily in the lower limbs and are commoner in women. In its most advanced form, elephantiasis may prevent people from carrying out their normal daily activities. Lymphatic filariasis may
also evolve towards a genital disease (hydrocoele) that is characterized by a swelling of the scrotum and penis.
The vast majority of infected people are asymptomatic, but virtually all of them suffer from damages to the lymphatic system and the kidneys, and from an altered body's immune system.
Treatment
People infected with filariasis who have microfilaraemia or a positive antigen test should receive antifilarial drug treatment to eliminate microfilariae. Unfortunately, the medicines available have limited effect on adult worms. Treatment also involves
the
management of morbidity and disability prevention (MMDP)
that includes simple hygiene measures, such as basic skin care and exercise, to prevent acute attacks and progression of lymphoedema to elephantiasis. For management of hydrocoele, surgery may be appropriate. MMDP includes also psychological and socioeconomic
support for people with disabling conditions to ensure that they have equal access to rehabilitation services and opportunities for health, education and income. Activities beyond medical care and rehabilitation include promoting positive attitudes
towards people with disabilities, preventing the causes of disabilities, providing education and training, supporting local initiatives, and supporting micro- and macro-income-generating schemes.
Preventive chemotherapy is used at the community level to
eliminate microfilariae from the blood of infected individuals in order to interrupt transmission of infection by mosquitoes.
Fact sheets
Lymphatic filariasis
Q&A
Frequently asked questions on lymphatic filariasis
Databases and tools
Interactive graph (Global Health Observatory)
Preventive chemotherapy data portal
Preventive chemotherapy data bank
Resolutions and decisions
Elimination of lymphatic  filariasis  as   a public  health  problem, 1997
|
WHA50.29
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
News
All →
NTD integration in Madagascar – just published
05 January 2025 | Evidence from Madagascar shows that integration of LF MDA with immunization activities is feasible and cost effective.
26 May 2025
Departmental update
Progress for NTDs: two resolutions adopted at WHA78
1 April 2025
Departmental update
Global meeting calls for stronger partnerships to tackle skin NTDs
24 March 2025
Departmental update
Second global meeting on skin NTDs focuses on advancing integration and innovation
Our work
Building capacity of national programmes to implement WHO recommended strategies
Improving access to recommended medicines and diagnostics for lymphatic filariasis
Providing evidence-based guidance to countries for lymphatic filariasis
Facilitating and monitoring progress of countries towards elimination of lymphatic filariasis as a public health problem
Promoting the integrated approach to skin-related neglected tropical diseases
Working Groups
WHO Skin NTDs Working Groups (office.com)
Following the Skin NTD Meeting held in Geneva, Switzerland from 27-31 March 2023, WHO is proposing to establish different INFORMAL WORKING GROUPS to help follow up of the main outcomes and keep the momentum.
Calls
3 October 2025
Call for consultation
Survey : WHA resolution on skin diseases as a global public health priority
Publications
All →
3 October 2025
Global programme to eliminate lymphatic filariasis: progress report, 2024
Lymphatic filariasis (LF) is a vector-borne,
parasitic disease in humans that results in
immense suffering among people affected.
This neglected...
Download
Read More
8 July 2025
Monitoring and epidemiological assessment of mass drug administration in the global programme to eliminate...
This revision and update of the 2011 guidance includes a new mapping protocol, adapted from
the TAS, as a practical tool for determining when MDA is...
Download
Read More
Events
4 December 2025 14:00 – 15:30 EET
Loiasis: a very neglected disease in Central Africa
Feature story
22 September 2019
Indonesia launches final round of Mass Drugs Administration (MDA) Campaign to eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis
Multimedia
Infographic
Countries reporting cases on at least one skin-NTD, 2017-2021
20 October 2020
How do we tackle the skin NTDs to reach the 2030 NTD road map targets?
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for
lymphatic filariasis
or
Elephantiasis
More information on other disease related to lymphatic filariasis
Podoconiosis
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr. Jonathan King
Scientist
kingj@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Yaws (Endemic treponematoses)
Communicable diseases
Buruli ulcer  (Mycobacterium ulcerans infection)