Neglected tropical diseases -- GLOBAL
Skip to main content
Overview
Neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) are a diverse group of conditions
1
caused by a variety of pathogens (including viruses, bacteria, parasites, fungi and toxins) and associated with devastating health, social and economic consequences. NTDs are mainly prevalent among impoverished communities in tropical areas, although some have a much larger geographical distribution. It is estimated that NTDs affect more than 1 billion people, while the number of people requiring NTD interventions (both preventive and curative) is
1.495 billion.
The epidemiology of NTDs is complex and often related to environmental conditions. Many of them are vector-borne, have animal reservoirs and are associated with complex life cycles. All these factors make their public-health control challenging.
-------------------------------------
1.
NTDs include: Buruli ulcer; Chagas disease; dengue and chikungunya; dracunculiasis; echinococcosis; foodborne trematodiases; human African trypanosomiasis; leishmaniasis; leprosy; lymphatic filariasis; mycetoma, chromoblastomycosis and other deep mycoses; noma; onchocerciasis; rabies; scabies and other ectoparasitoses; schistosomiasis; soil-transmitted helminthiases; snakebite envenoming; taeniasis/cysticercosis; trachoma; and yaws.
Impact
WHO estimates that over 1.495 billion of the world’s population should be targeted by prevention and treatment activities for at least one of these diseases, every year.
In addition to significant mortality and morbidity - approximately 120,000 deaths and 14.1 million disability adjusted life years (DALYs) lost annually, NTDs cost developing communities the equivalent of billions of United States dollars each year in direct health costs, loss of productivity and reduced socioeconomic and educational attainment. They are also responsible for other consequences such as disability, stigmatization, social exclusion and discrimination and place considerable financial strain on patients and their families.
In spite of this, NTDs have historically ranked very low and almost absent from the global health policy agenda – only to gain recognition in 2015 with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG target 3.3). SDG3 can therefore be achieved only if the NTD goals are met but, because interventions to tackle NTDs are widely cross-sectoral, increasing their global prioritization can in fact catalyze progress to achieve all SDGs.
WHO response
WHO’s action to control, prevent, eliminate and eradicate NTDs is guided by
the NTD road map for 2021-2030
, that moves away from vertical disease programmes to integrated cross-cutting approaches. The aim is to facilitate the coordinated scale-up of key interventions through public health approaches such as preventive chemotherapy, individual case management, vector control, veterinary public health and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH).
The overarching 2030 global targets include a 90% reduction in the number of people requiring treatment for NTDs; a 75% reduction in DALYs related to NTDs; at least 100 countries eliminating at least one NTD; and the eradication of two diseases (dracunculiasis and yaws).
Additional cross-cutting targets focus on integrated approaches, multisectoral coordination, universal health coverage and country ownership, while a further set of targets has been devised to measure progress against each disease.
Fact sheets
Buruli ulcer (Mycobacterium ulcerans infection)
Chagas disease (also known as American trypanosomiasis)
Chromoblastomycosis
Dengue
Dracunculiasis (Guinea-worm disease)
Echinococcosis
Foodborne trematode infections
Trypanosomiasis, human African (sleeping sickness)
Leishmaniasis
Leprosy
Lymphatic filariasis
Mycetoma
Noma
Onchocerciasis
Podoconiosis (non-filarial lymphoedema)
Rabies
Scabies
Schistosomiasis
Snakebite envenoming
Soil-transmitted helminth infections
Sporotrichosis
Taeniasis/cysticercosis
Trachoma
Tungiasis
Yaws
Questions and answers
Frequently asked questions on Neglected tropical diseases
Road map for neglected tropical diseases
Ending the neglect to attain the Sustainable Development Goals: A road map for neglected tropical diseases 2021–2030
WHA Resolutions and Decisions
Resolutions and Decisions on Neglected Tropical Diseases since 1948
Initiatives and groups
Skin NTDs Laboratory Network (Skin NTDs LABNET)
Global Initiative on Artificial Intelligence for Skin Conditions
Global Buruli Ulcer Initiative (GBUI)
Global Onchocerciasis Network for Elimination (GONE)
United Against Rabies
WHO teams
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
Latest news
All →
4 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO and Bayer AG renew longstanding collaboration to eliminate three deadly neglected tropical diseases
22 October 2025
Departmental update
Global progress against neglected tropical diseases continues despite challenges, new WHO report finds
20 October 2025
News release
Fiji becomes the 26th country to eliminate trachoma as a public health problem
19 October 2025
Departmental update
WHO and partners strengthen coordination for NTD programmes and supply chain delivery
30 January
World NTD Day
Ending NTDs: together towards 2030
Visit the campaign page
→
Science in 5
Episode #115 - Dengue Fever
27 March 2024 | video (webinar).
Why is Dengue fever spreading to places it did not exist before? What are the symptoms and treatments? What about vaccines? Dr Raman Velayudhan explains in Science in 5.
Feature stories
All →
21 November 2025
Namibia leads the way in rabies prevention – adopting oral rabies vaccination to accelerate progress
4 September 2025
Rabies surveillance in action: Saving lives in Cross River State, Nigeria
30 January 2025
A historic milestone! WHO verifies Niger free of onchocerciasis as the first country on the African continent
Latest publications
All →
17 November 2025
Global report on neglected tropical diseases 2025: executive summary
In 2025, the WHO Global Neglected Tropical Diseases Programme marks 20 years of action and data. Since its establishment in 2005, a concerted effort involving...
Download
Read More
27 October 2025
Dengue case management for primary health care and home-based care: Booklet for health professionals...
The Dengue Case Management for Primary Health Care and Home-Based Care booklet, developed by the WHO South-East Asia Regional Office, is a comprehensive...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global report on neglected tropical diseases 2025
In 2025, the WHO Global Neglected Tropical Diseases
Programme marks 20 years of action and data. Since
its establishment in 2005, a concerted effort...
Download
Read More
WHO Academy Course
Neglected Tropical Diseases Monitoring and Evaluation Framework
Safety in administering medicines for neglected tropical diseases
One Health in action against Neglected Tropical Diseases
Water, sanitation and hygiene for the prevention and care of neglected tropical diseases
Photo stories
All →
Yaws success story
Echinococcosis campaign in Eastern Europe
Facts in pictures
All →
4 April 2024
Chagas disease
4 April 2020
Trachoma
Our work
All →
Addressing antivenoms issues
Building capacity of national control programmes to implement WHO‐recommended strategies to eliminate STH
Building capacity of national programmes to implement WHO recommended strategies
Building capacity to enhance early diagnosis and clinical management of cystic echinococcosis
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Malaria
Diseases and conditions
Tuberculosis
Other
Universal health coverage