Tuberculosis
Skip to main content
Overview
TB is caused by bacteria (Mycobacterium tuberculosis) and it most often affects the lungs. TB is spread through the air when people with lung TB cough, sneeze or spit. A person needs to inhale only a few germs to become infected.
Every year, 10 million people fall ill with tuberculosis (TB). Despite being a preventable and curable disease, 1.5 million people die from TB each year – making it the world’s top infectious killer.
TB is the leading cause of death of people with HIV and also a major contributor to antimicrobial resistance.
Most of the people who fall ill with TB live in low- and middle-income countries, but TB is present all over the world. About half of all people with TB can be found in 8 countries: Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines and
South Africa.
About a quarter of the global population is estimated to have been infected with TB bacteria, but most people will not go on to develop TB disease and some will clear the infection. Those who are infected but not (yet) ill with the disease cannot transmit it.
People infected with TB bacteria have a 5–10% lifetime risk of falling ill with TB. Those with compromised immune systems, such as people living with HIV, malnutrition or diabetes, or people who use tobacco, have a higher risk of falling ill.
Symptoms
Common symptoms of TB disease include:
• Prolonged cough
• Chest pain
• Weakness or fatigue
• Weight loss
• Fever
• Night sweats
Often, these symptoms will be mild for many months, thus leading to delays in seeking care and increasing the risk of spreading the infection to others.
If the healthcare provider suspects a patient to have TB disease, they will send the patient for testing. In the case of suspected lung TB disease, patients will be asked to give a sputum sample for testing for TB bacteria. For non-lung TB disease, samples
of affected body fluids and tissue can be tested. WHO recommends rapid molecular diagnostic tests as initial tests for people showing signs and symptoms of TB. Other diagnostic tools can include sputum smear microscopy and chest X-rays.
With TB infection, a person gets infected with TB bacteria that lie inactive in the body. This infection can develop into TB disease if their immune system weakens. People with TB infection do not show any signs or symptoms of TB. To identify TB infection,
healthcare providers will screen at-risk patients to rule out active TB, and they may use a skin or blood test to check for TB infection.
Treatment
TB disease is curable. It is treated by standard 6 month course of 4 antibiotics. Common drugs include rifampicin and isoniazid. In some cases the TB bacteria does not respond to the standard drugs. In this case, the patient has drug-resistant TB. Treatment
for drug-resistant TB is longer and more complex.
The course of TB drugs is provided to the patient with information, supervision and support by a health worker or trained volunteer. Without such support, treatment adherence can be difficult. If the treatment is not properly completed, the disease can
become drug-resistant and can spread.
In the case of TB infection (where the patient is infected with TB bacteria but not ill), TB preventive treatment can be given to stop the onset of disease. This treatment uses the same drugs for a shorter time. Recent treatment options have shortened
the duration to treatment to only 1 or 3 months, as compared to 6 months in the past.
Fact sheets
Tuberculosis
Questions and answers
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis: Systematic screening
Tuberculosis: Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB)
Tuberculosis: Multidrug-resistant (MDR-TB) or rifampicin-resistant TB (RR-TB)
Tuberculosis: Public-private mix (PPM) for TB care and control
Guidelines
WHO consolidated guidelines on tuberculosis: Module 1: Prevention: tuberculosis preventive treatment
WHO operational handbook on tuberculosis: Module 1: Prevention: tuberculosis preventive treatment
WHO consolidated guidelines on tuberculosis Module 2: Screening – Systematic screening for tuberculosis disease
WHO operational handbook on tuberculosis Module 2: Screening – Systematic screening for tuberculosis disease
WHO consolidated guidelines on tuberculosis Module 3: Diagnosis – Rapid diagnostics for tuberculosis detection
WHO operational handbook on tuberculosis Module 3: Diagnosis – Rapid diagnostics for tuberculosis detection
WHO Consolidated Guidelines on Tuberculosis, Module 4: Treatment – Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis Treatment
WHO Operational Handbook on Tuberculosis, Module 4: Treatment – Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis Treatment
WHO consolidated guidelines on tuberculosis Module 5: Management of tuberculosis in children and adolescents
WHO operational handbook on tuberculosis Module 5: Management of tuberculosis in children and adolescents
Databases and tools
TB Data
Initiatives and groups
Alliance of Countries on the Fight Against Tuberculosis
WHO DG Flagship Initiative on ending TB
WHO 1+1 Initiative: Global youth movement to end TB
WHO Civil Society Task Force on Tuberculosis
Global Task Force on TB Impact Measurement
Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for Tuberculosis (STAG-TB)
Technical Advisory Group on Tuberculosis Diagnostics and Laboratory Strengthening
Technical Advisory Group on dosing of TB medicines for adults and children
Tuberculosis Vaccine Accelerator Council
WHO TB Supranational Reference Laboratory Network (SRLN)
Resolutions and decisions
WHA71.3 Preparation for a high-level meeting of the General Assembly on ending tuberculosis
WHA69.11 Health in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
WHA67.11 Global strategy and targets for tuberculosis prevention, care and control after 2015
WHA62.15 Prevention and control of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis and extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis
WHA60.19 Tuberculosis control: progress and long-term planning
WHA58.11 Sustainable financing for tuberculosis prevention and control
WHA53.1 Stop Tuberculosis Initiative
Training
End TB Course Series
Technical work
Global Tuberculosis Programme
Vaccine development
TB & COVID-19
Global Tuberculosis Programme and the COVID-19 Pandemic Response
Questions and answers
Global TB report
Access TB report →
OpenWHO Course
End TB Courses →
Training courses dedicated to several aspects of Tuberculosis are available in multiple languages on the Open WHO platform.  The TB courses are temporarily unavailable. They will be back online in February 2025.
UN High-level Meeting
Second High-level Meeting →
The United Nations General Assembly will hold the second high-level meeting on the fight against tuberculosis on 22 September 2023.
News
All →
12 November 2025
News release
Global gains in tuberculosis response endangered by funding challenges
6 November 2025
Departmental update
New WHO report urges bold steps for equitable access to novel TB vaccines
8 October 2025
Departmental update
WHO releases new guidelines on tuberculosis and undernutrition
1 October 2025
Departmental update
WHO Accelerator Platform for Novel TB regimens
Our work
All →
Ending TB in children and adolescents
Preventing TB
Scaling up diagnosis of TB and drug-resistant TB
Strengthening multisectoral accountability to end TB
Publications
All  →
14 November 2025
Priority setting in tuberculosis programme planning: policy brief
In an era of constrained resources and tightening budgets, strategic prioritization in tuberculosis (TB) programming is more critical than ever. Countries...
Download
Read More
12 November 2025
Global tuberculosis report 2025
The WHO Global tuberculosis report 2025 provides a comprehensive and
up-to-date assessment of the TB epidemic, and of progress in prevention,
...
Download
Read More
3 November 2025
Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for Tuberculosis: annual meeting report, Geneva, Switzerland,...
This report provides the conclusions and recommendations of the 25th meeting of the WHO Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for Tuberculosis (STAG-TB),...
Download
Read More
29 October 2025
Consolidated guidance on tuberculosis data generation and use: Module 4: Surveys of costs faced by households...
One of the three high-level targets of the World Health Organization’s End TB Strategy (2016–2035) is that no TB-affected households face total...
Download
Read More
Public call
All  →
7 November 2025
Call for submissions
Public notice and comment on draft WHO Guidance on Evidence Generation for new tuberculosis diagnostics
4 November 2025
Call for consultation
Public notice: Guideline Development Group meeting on TB Treatment and Care, November 24-28, 2025, Geneva, Switzerland
24 October 2025
Call for consultation
Public notice: Guideline Development Group meeting on policy updates on new tests, specimen types and strategies for diagnosis of TB and MDR-TB, November 10-14, 2025, Geneva, Switzerland
Events
All  →
#EndTB Webinar: Multisectoral engagement to address the social determinants and key drivers of the TB epidemic
11 November 2025 12:00 – 14:30 CET
Together for a TB-free world: Financing and access solutions for novel tuberculosis vaccines
6 November 2025 11:00 – 15:00 SAST
#EndTB Webinar: Virtual launch on tackling TB and undernutrition together
22 October 2025 12:00 – 13:30 CET
Campaigns
All  →
World TB Day 2025: Yes! We Can End TB: Commit, Invest, Deliver
24 March 2025
The second United Nations high-level meeting on the fight to end tuberculosis
UN General Assembly High-Level Meeting on the fight against tuberculosis 26 September 2018
Infographics
All  →
Infographic
Tuberculosis is the World's Leading Infectious Disease Killer
Infographic
In 2023 10.8 Million People Fell Ill. Since 2000 79 Million Lives Have Been Saved
Infographic
Progress Towards Reaching Global UN  Targets to End TB
Infographic
TB also caused Antimicrobial Resistance realted deaths
Videos
All  →
20 March 2025
WHO World TB Day 2025 video message
17 March 2025
WHO press conference on global health issues – 17 March 2025
24 February 2025
Global #EndTBRun Challenge
Podcasts
Episode #135 – Facing the TB crisis
Severe resource shortages are threatening the global response to end tuberculosis. Is the world on the brink of a global TB crisis? A quarter of the world’s population could be infected with TB and not even know it. Is there a cure?  What is the treatment? How do we diagnose TB? Listen in to Dr Tereza Kasaeva on Science in 5 today.
Episode #58 - TB & COVID-19
If you have Tuberculosis, what is your risk from COVID-19? How can you keep yourself safe during the pandemic? Why is it important that the world does not take its eyes off TB during the Pandemic? Dr Tereza Kasaeva explains in Science in 5 this week.
Features
23 March 2020
Emily: A Day in the Life of a TB Nurse
Fact file
13 November 2025
10 facts on tuberculosis
Photo story
21 August 2020
Youth to end TB
Apps & tools
Global TB data are at your fingertips with this app!
Global TB Report
Download from:
Google Play
|
Apple Store
Tool for healthcare workers to manage TB preventive care services
Prevent TB
Download from:
Google Play
|
Apple Store
Digital resources for TB →
An online guide on the use of digital technologies for TB programmes.
Tuberculosis (TB) remains an urgent global public health threat. Information and communication technology presents opportunities to address this challenge on different fronts.
WHO TB Knowledge Sharing Platform
Download →
Download →
Related health topics
All →
Physical environment
Antimicrobial resistance
Communicable diseases
HIV
Substances
Tobacco
Other
Universal health coverage