Syphilis  -- Global
Skip to main content
Overview
Syphilis is a bacterial sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by
Treponema pallidum
which results in substantial morbidity and mortality, and it is curable. Syphilis is transmitted through sexual contact with the infectious lesions, via blood transfusion or from a pregnant woman to her fetus.
Mother-to-child transmission of syphilis
is usually devastating to the fetus in cases that were not detected or
treated sufficiently early in pregnancy
. Maternal syphilis, when untreated, treated late or not treated with penicillin, results in adverse birth outcomes (ABOs) estimated in 50−80% of cases, depending on the stage of syphilis. These ABOs are often severe and include stillbirth (most commonly), neonatal death, prematurity, low birth weight, and congenitally infected infants.
Syphilis can be prevented through safer sex practices including the correct and consistent use of condoms. Many people with syphilis do not have any symptoms or have only minor symptoms that go unnoticed. Identifying infection through laboratory tests and treatment of positive cases will prevent further transmission and adverse pregnancy outcomes including congenital syphilis. Screening can be done using rapid tests that can provide results in less than 20 minutes, allowing for immediate treatment.
When untreated, syphilis lasts many years and goes through different stages. Treatment for syphilis is done with injectable penicillin benzathine, with 1 to 3 doses depending on the stage of the disease. Only penicillin can prevent congenital syphilis. Treatment with penicillin has been hampered by periodic and prolonged
shortages of benzathine penicillin
in numerous countries, including high-, low- and middle-income countries.
Symptoms
Many people with syphilis do not present symptoms or do not perceive them. Untreated, syphilis lasts many years and is characterized into different stages. Sexual transmission typically occurs during early stages, i.e., up to 2 years after infection.
During the initial phase (primary syphilis), which lasts on average 21 days, a solitary, painless, usually hard and round sore (chancre) appears at the site of inoculation (contact), often in the vagina, penis or anus (but it may also be extra-genital) and may go unnoticed. The chancre heals with or without treatment within 3 to 10 weeks. If untreated, the disease progresses to the secondary stage.
Secondary syphilis is characterized by a rash that can vary widely and mimic other infectious or non-infectious conditions, but characteristically affects the palms and soles. The rash is non-itchy and can be minimal enough to be overlooked. In warm and moist areas of the body, such as the anus and labia, large white or grey raised lesions may develop at the location of the primary chancre (condyloma lata). The symptoms and signs of secondary syphilis spontaneously resolve, even without treatment. Without treatment, the latent stage starts.
Latent syphilis presents no clinical symptoms or signs and the treatment is different from the early phase. After years or decades without treatment, neurological and cardiovascular diseases among others may occur.
Treatment
Syphilis diagnosis is based on the person’s history, physical examination, laboratory testing and sometimes radiology, as symptoms are not common or noticeable. Identifying asymptomatic infection through laboratory tests and treatment of positive cases will prevent further transmission and adverse pregnancy outcomes, including congenital syphilis. Laboratory tests for syphilis include direct detection of
T. pallidum
or indirect methods such as serology. Rapid screening and diagnostic tests are also available and can provide results in less than 20 minutes, facilitating immediate treatment initiation.
WHO recommends syphilis to be treated with injectable penicillin (benzathine penicillin G) with 1 or 3 doses, depending on the stage of the disease. WHO has detailed
treatment guidelines for syphilis
, and one specifically for the
screening and treatment of syphilis in pregnancy
.
Congenital syphilis
There are currently no diagnostic tests for
congenital syphilis
. All live or stillborn infants of women with syphilis should be examined for evidence of congenital syphilis. Live-born infants should be examined and tested at birth to define treatment requirement. When indicated, also at monthly intervals for 3 months until the infant’s serology are, and remain, negative, as maternal antibodies can be passively transmitted to the baby during pregnancy.
Fact sheets
Syphilis
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Questions and answers
Questions and answers on healthy sex
Databases and tools
Sexually Transmitted Infections - Strategic information
Syphilis in pregnancy
Sex workers and syphilis
Men who have sex with men and syphilis
Global health observatory - Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)
Initiatives and groups
Elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
Resolutions and decisions
WHA A69/59 - Global health sector strategies on HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, for the period 2016–2021
Technical work
Global Sexually Transmitted Infections Programme
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research (SRH)
Mother-to-child transmission of syphilis
News
All →
13 October 2025
News release
Maldives becomes the first country to achieve ‘triple elimination’ of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
26 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO expands guidance on sexually transmitted infections and reviews country progress on policy implementation
23 July 2025
Departmental update
First-ever guidance for Triple Elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
15 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO prequalifies the first triple diagnostic test for HIV, hepatitis B and syphilis, a milestone toward global disease elimination goals
Publications
All →
14 July 2025
Country guidance for planning triple elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and...
This publication provides guidance for planning country-specific programming to achieve the triple elimination of mother-to-child (or vertical) transmission...
Download
Read More
9 July 2025
Guidelines for the management of asymptomatic sexually transmitted infections
WHO's
global health sector strategies for HIV, viral hepatitis, and sexually transmitted infections (STIs) aim
to reduce gonorrhoea and syphilis...
Download
Read More
11 March 2025
Integration of HIV and syphilis testing services as part of mpox response: standard operating procedures
As
mpox mortality has been associated to HIV infection, and its mode of
transmission is direct contact, including sexual contact, it is
important...
Download
Read More
27 February 2025
Self-testing implementation toolkit for HIV, hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections
Self-testing is a self-care intervention recommended by WHO as an
additional testing strategy for HIV, hepatitis C and syphilis,
respectively....
Download
Read More
Features
6 June 2019
Four curable sexually transmitted infections - all you need to know
Related topics
Diseases and conditions
Congenital disorders
Communicable diseases
HIV
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health
Diseases and conditions
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Conditions
Stillbirth
Other
Universal health coverage