Rabies
Skip to main content
Overview
Rabies is a viral zoonotic disease that causes
progressive and fatal inflammation of the brain and spinal cord. Clinically, it
has two forms:
Furious rabies – characterized by hyperactivity and hallucinations.
Paralytic rabies – characterized by paralysis and coma.
Although fatal once clinical signs appear,
rabies is entirely avoidable; vaccines, medicines and technologies have long
been available to prevent death from rabies. Nevertheless, rabies still kills
tens of thousands of people each year. Of these cases, approximately 99% are
acquired from the bite of an infected dog.
Dog-mediated human rabies can be eliminated by
tackling the disease at its source: infected dogs. Making people aware of how
to avoid the bites of rabid dogs, to seek treatment when bitten and to
vaccinate animals can successfully disrupt the rabies transmission cycle.
Rabies is estimated to cause 59 000 human
deaths annually in over 150 countries, with 95% of cases occurring in Africa
and Asia. Due to underreporting and uncertain estimates, this number is likely
a gross underestimate. The burden of disease is disproportionally borne by
rural poor populations, with approximately half of cases attributable to
children under 15 years of age.
Symptoms
Early symptoms of a rabies infection can
include a fever with pain and unusual or unexplained tingling, pricking or
burning sensation (paraesthesia) at the wound site. In later states, the virus
spreads to the central nervous system, causing fatal inflammation of the brain
and spinal cord. The incubation period of the disease can vary from 1 week to 1
year, though it is typically 2–3 months.
The two types of rabies show different
symptoms. Furious rabies causes signs of hyperactivity, excitable behaviour,
hydrophobia (fear of water) and sometimes aerophobia (fear of drafts or of
fresh air). Death occurs after a few days due to cardio-respiratory arrest.
Paralytic rabies, which accounts for about
20% of the total number of human cases, runs a less dramatic and usually longer
course than the furious form. Muscles gradually become paralysed, starting at
the site of the bite or scratch. A coma slowly develops and eventually death
occurs. The paralytic form of rabies is often misdiagnosed, contributing to the
under-reporting of the disease.
Treatment
Vaccinating dogs is the most cost-effective strategy for preventing rabies in people, and human rabies vaccines exist for pre-exposure immunization.
If you are bitten or scratched by an animal, particularly a dog:
Wash the wound immediately with soap or detergent.
Flush the wound thoroughly for about 15 minutes with copious amounts of water.
Apply an iodine-containing or anti-viral medication to the wound 15 minutes after it has been washed and flushed.
Avoid applying irritants to the wounds such as chili powder, plant juices, acids and alkalis.
Avoid covering the wound with dressings or bandages.
Seek transportation to a health care facility for further assessment and treatment by a healthcare professional.
If possible, safely confine the biting animal and collect information on it and the bite circumstance to provide to the health care professional and public health officer. Keep the biting animal confined and under observation for 10 days.
WHO continues to promote human rabies prevention through the elimination of rabies in dogs, dog bite prevention strategies, and more widespread use of the intradermal route for post-exposure prophylaxis, which reduces volume and therefore the cost of cell-cultured vaccine by 60% to 80%.
Fact sheets
Rabies
Questions and answers
FAQs on rabies for general public
FAQs on rabies for clinicians
Databases and tools
Global Health Observatory (GHO) data
World Animal Health Information Database (WAHIS)
Resolutions and decisions
Rabies
1950 | WHA3.20
Rage
1950 | WHA3.20
World Rabies Day
World Rabies Day | 28
th
September
Training
Rabies & One Health: From basics to cross-sectoral action to stop human rabies deaths
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
Events/Campaigns
World Rabies Day
28 September | World Rabies Day is celebrated annually to raise awareness about rabies prevention and to highlight progress in defeating this horrifying disease.
News
All →
13 June 2024
Joint News Release
Gavi to boost access to life-saving human rabies vaccines in over 50 countries: Gavi, WHO and UAR
11 January 2024
Departmental update
Building collaborations and science capacity in Africa – Afrique One
Science in 5
Episode #126 - Rabies: Protect yourself and your pets
27 September 2024 | What is rabies? How serious is it? How can you prevent rabies? Dr Bernadette Abela explains this and what you can do immediately after a bite in Science in 5 today.
Our work
Participate to improve global rabies data collection
Vaccinating against rabies to save lives
Human rabies prevention and management
Leading and coordinating anti-rabies efforts with "One Health" partners
Publications
All →
8 September 2025
Routine health information system and health facility data for neglected tropical diseases: Rabies
This guidance was developed based on a template provided to health programmes by the WHO Division of Data, Analytics and Delivery for Impact. WHO disease...
Download
Read More
8 August 2025
A dual battle: rabies and snakebite envenoming in South-East Asia
Rabies and snakebite envenoming (SBE) are endemic in most countries in the WHO South-East Asia Region (SEAR), which bears the highest global burdens of...
Download
Read More
20 March 2025
Asia-Pacific Rabies Meeting Bangkok, Thailand, 16–18 July 2024
Rabies, despite being entirely preventable, remains a significant public health concern in the Asia-Pacific Region. The disease is predominantly transmitted...
Download
Read More
Facts in pictures
26 February 2018
Rabies
Vaccine Assessment Tool
Rabies Vaccine Readiness Assessment Tool
30 April 2025 | The Rabies Vaccine Readiness Assessment Tool was developed to support countries in evaluating their preparedness for the introduction and rollout of human rabies vaccines.
WHO Academy Course
Rabies & One Health: From basics to cross-sectoral action to stop human rabies deaths
Feature story
All →
21 November 2025
Namibia leads the way in rabies prevention – adopting oral rabies vaccination to accelerate progress
4 September 2025
Rabies surveillance in action: Saving lives in Cross River State, Nigeria
Multimedia
All →
Infographic
Rabies -- Zero deaths by 2030
Infographic
The facts on Rabies
Infographic
Rabies is 100% vaccine preventable
16 September 2025
How To Stay Safe Around Dogs
16 September 2025
Preventing Rabies – By Florence
16 September 2025
How to Stay Safe Around Dogs – By Anthony
Anne Marie Labouche
©
Credits
Anne Marie Labouche
©
Credits
Anne Marie Labouche
©
Credits
More information
Information on rabies for travellers
Rabies network
Rabies Bulletin Europe
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr Bernadette Abela-Ridder
Technical officer
abelab@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Echinococcosis
Diseases and conditions
Foodborne trematode infections
Diseases and conditions
Snakebite envenoming
Diseases and conditions
Taeniasis and cysticercosis