Traditional, Complementary and Integrative Medicine
Skip to main content
Overview
Traditional medicine
Traditional medicine refers to codified or non-codified systems for healthcare and well-being, comprising practices, skills, knowledge and philosophies originating in different historical and cultural contexts, which are distinct from and pre-date biomedicine, evolving with science for current use from an experience-based origin. Traditional medicine emphasizes nature-based remedies and holistic, personalized approaches to restore balance of mind, body and environment.
Complementary medicine
Complementary medicine refers to additional healthcare practices that are not part of a country’s mainstream medicine. Evidence-based complementary medicine has the potential to support mainstream medicine and more comprehensively support people’s health and well-being needs.
Integrative medicine
Integrative medicine is an i
nterdisciplinary and evidence-based approach to health and well-being by using a combination of biomedical and traditional and/or complementary medical knowledge, skills and practices.
Herbal medicines
Herbal medicines include herbs, herbal materials, herbal preparations and finished herbal products, that contain as active ingredients parts of plants, other plant materials, or combinations thereof.
Impact
The WHO global report on traditional and complementary medicine 2019
was developed to address the gap in reliable, credible and official data from Member States in the area of T&CM.
This report reviews global progress in T&CM over the past two decades and is based on contributions from 179 WHO Member States. It provides valuable information for policy-makers, health professionals and the public for capitalizing on the potential contribution of T&CM to health and well-being.
WHO response
The WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2025–2034
, envisions a world in which everyone has universal access to people-centred traditional, complementary, and integrative medicine (TCIM), contributing to the highest attainable standard of health and well-being. The Strategy promotes the integration of TCIM into health systems in ways that are evidence-based, culturally respectful, and aligned with sustainable development.
Over the next decade, the Strategy will focus on four strategic objectives:
strengthening the evidence base for TCIM;
supporting the provision of safe and effective TCIM through appropriate regulatory mechanisms;
integrating safe and effective TCIM into health systems; and
optimizing the cross-sector value of TCIM and empowering communities.
Implementation will be guided by nine core principles: the evidence base; , holism and health; sustainability and biodiversity; the right to health and autonomy; Indigenous Peoples’ rights, culture and health; people-centred care and community engagement; integrated health services; and health equity.
The strategy recognizes the importance of protecting traditional knowledge and promoting responsible use of natural resources. WHO will support countries with technical assistance, standards development, and coordinated implementation and monitoring.
WHO’s work on TCIM aims to improve health outcomes and support advances towards universal health coverage, with the goal of contributing evidence-based approaches to the highest attainable standard of health and well-being for all.
Questions and answers
Traditional medicine
Initiatives and groups
International Regulatory Cooperation for Herbal Medicines (IRCH)
Technical work
Traditional, Complementary and Integrative Medicine (TCI)
Global Traditional Medicine Centre
News
All →
14 November 2025
Departmental update
Leadership engagement growing for evidence-based traditional medicine ahead of 2nd WHO Summit in New Delhi, India
7 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO Bulletin special issue on traditional medicine
31 October 2025
Departmental update
WHO brings together Member States to strengthen quality and safety of traditional, complementary and integrative medicine products
29 October 2025
Departmental update
16th Annual Meeting of the WHO International Regulatory Cooperation for Herbal Medicines (IRCH)
Latest publications
All →
30 October 2025
Global traditional medicine strategy 2025-2034
WHO recognizes the growing role of traditional medicine worldwide and the need for evidence-based integration into health systems. In 2023, the World Health...
Download
Read More
11 July 2025
Mapping the application of artificial intelligence in traditional medicine: technical brief
Artificial Intelligence (AI) refers to the capability of algorithms integrated into systems
and tools to learn from data so that they can perform...
Download
Read More
3 June 2025
WHO Traditional Medicine Global Summit 2023  meeting recommendations
The first WHO Traditional Medicine Global Summit “Towards health and well-being for all” was held in Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India,...
Download
Read More
23 May 2025
WHO Global Traditional Medicine Centre: annual report 2024
The WHO Global Traditional Medicine Centre (GTMC), a WHO headquarters department outposted in Jamnagar, Gujarat, India, is powered by a mission to enhance...
Download
Read More
Our work
Implementation of the WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2014-2023
Events
All →
Launch of a joint WHO-ITU-WIPO technical brief at the AI for Good Global Summit 2025: Mapping the application of artificial intelligence in traditional medicine
11 July 2025 14:40 – 15:10 CET
Keynote plenary panel at World Health Summit Regional Meeting - Restoring balance: Scaling up access to evidence-based traditional medicine for health and well-being
25 April 2025 15:15 – 16:45 IST
2024 World Conference on Traditional Medicine
3 – 4 December 2024
Multimedia
All →
3 October 2025
Message by WHO Director-General for 3rd Traditional and Complementary Medicine Congress in Türkiye
28 April 2025
Traditional medicine: WHO Director General addresses the World Health Summit Regional Meeting
22 April 2025
Introductory video for the second WHO Global Summit on Traditional Medicine
6 February 2025
Traditional Medicine: Message by WHO's Director-General at world conference in China in 2024
Related health topics
Health systems
Nursing and midwifery
Health systems
Palliative care
Health systems
Primary health care
Health interventions
Rehabilitation