Newborn health
Skip to main content
Overview
To ensure every child survives and thrives to reach their full potential, we must focus on improving care around the time of birth and the first week of life.
The high rates of preventable death and poor health and well-being of newborns and children under the age of five are indicators of the uneven coverage of life-saving interventions and, more broadly, of inadequate social and economic development. Poverty, poor nutrition and insufficient access to clean water and sanitation are all harmful factors, as is insufficient access to quality health services such as essential care for newborns.
Health promotion, disease prevention services (such as vaccinations) and treatment of common childhood illnesses are essential if children are to thrive as well as survive.
Impact
Newborn deaths account for 47% of deaths among children under the age of 5 globally, resulting in 2.4 million lives lost each year. About one third of newborn deaths occur on the day of birth and close to three quarters occur within the first week of life. In addition, almost 2 million babies born with no signs of life at 28 weeks of pregnancy or more (stillbirths) and 295 000 maternal deaths occur each year.
Children who die within the first 28 days of birth suffer from conditions and diseases associated with lack of quality care at birth or skilled care and treatment immediately after birth and in the first days of life. The vast majority of newborn deaths take place in low and middle-income countries.
WHO response
In 2014, 194 Member States of the Sixty-seventh World Health Assembly endorsed the action plan (Resolution WHA67.10). Led by UNICEF and the World Health Organization, Every Newborn Action Plan (ENAP) was guided by the advice of experts and partners and by multistakeholder consultations and a web-based consultation with over 300 comments from stakeholders. The WHO Director-General has been requested to monitor progress towards the achievement of the global goal and targets, reporting periodically to the World Health Assembly until 2030.
Twenty-eight focus countries were targeted for data collection through the use of a progress tracking tool. This systematic tracking of progress enables the assessment of the status of implementation of ENAP strategies, maps technical assistance needs and identifies barriers to implementation in line with the ENAP milestones and recommendations.
Another area of work is the Quality of Care Network. The main objective of the network is broadening the focus from access to care to include quality of care for maternal, newborn and child health to cut preventable maternal and newborn illness and deaths, and to improve every mother’s experience of care.
Fact sheets
Newborns: improving survival and well-being
Infant and young child feeding
Congenital disorders
Questions and answers
HIV and infant feeding
What is a preterm baby?
What health challenges do preterm babies face?
What kind of care do preterm babies need?
Databases and tools
Maternal and newborn data
Resolutions and decisions
Newborn health: draft action plan: Every newborn: an action plan to end preventable deaths: Report by the Secretariat | Resolution WHA67.21
Corrigendum | Resolution WHA67.21 Corr.1
Technical work
Newborn Health Unit
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health, and Aging
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research
News
All →
14 November 2025
News release
WHO promotes lifesaving intervention for small and preterm babies on first official World Prematurity Day
17 September 2025
Departmental update
"Patient safety from the start!" — WHO urges global investment in safe paediatric and newborn care
14 August 2025
Departmental update
World Patient Safety Day 2025: explore free courses to enhance newborn and child health
7 August 2025
Departmental update
WHO and partners launch global guide to advance respectful maternal and newborn care
Our work
Raising the importance of postnatal care
Making childbirth a positive experience
Promoting baby-friendly hospitals
Addressing critical knowledge gaps in newborn health
Focusing on postnatal care in low- and middle-income countries
Research in maternal, perinatal, and adolescent health
Strengthening home-based records implementation
Identifying common areas of progress with the Every Newborn Action Plan
Latest publications
All →
29 October 2025
The role of the health sector in supporting parents and caregivers to meet their parenting potential
Supporting parents and caregivers requires a whole-of-society approach, with coordinated responses from the health, education, social services, private...
Download
Read More
29 October 2025
Kangaroo mother care: a clinical practice guide
This guide is designed to help health workers support mothers and families in practising Kangaroo Mother Care (KMC) in health facilities at all levels...
Download
Read More
29 October 2025
Parent counselling guide on kangaroo mother care (KMC)
This guide supports health workers in counselling parents and families of preterm and low birth weight (LBW) newborns on the essential practice of Kangaroo...
Download
Read More
5 October 2025
Consolidated guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
Despite the existence of proven interventions for preventing, diagnosing and treating postpartum haemorrhage (PPH), effective implementation of evidence-based...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Important pregnancy tests and checks
Infographic
48% of infants under 6 months old are exclusively breastfed
Infographic
Investing in breastfeeding means investing in the future
Infographic
Breast-Milk is the first superfood
Videos
All →
1 September 2025
Patient safety from the start! Protecting every child’s health journey
5 June 2025
Improving quality of care to save lives in Sierra Leone
7 April 2025
Healthy beginnings, hopeful futures
7 March 2025
Ensuring kangaroo mother care for every small or preterm baby
Related health topics
Health interventions
Breastfeeding
Populations and demographics
Child health
Populations and demographics
Maternal health
Conditions
Stillbirth