Rift Valley fever
Skip to main content
Overview
Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a viral zoonosis that primarily affects animals but also has the capacity to infect humans. It is transmitted by mosquitoes and blood feeding flies. In humans, the disease ranges from a mild flu-like illness to severe haemorrhagic
fever that can be lethal. When livestock are infected the disease can cause significant economic losses due to high mortality rates in young animals and waves of abortions in pregnant females.
While some human infections have resulted from the bite of infected mosquitoes, most human infections result from contact with the blood or organs of infected animals. Occupational groups such as herders, farmers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians
are at higher risk of infection. Humans may also become infected by ingesting the unpasteurized or uncooked milk of infected animals. No human-to-human transmission of RVF has been documented.
The virus is a member of the
Phlebovirus
genus and was first identified in 1931 in a sheep epidemic on a farm in the Rift Valley of Kenya. Since then, outbreaks have been reported in sub-Saharan Africa and North Africa. In 2000, the
first reported cases of the disease outside the African continent came from Saudi Arabia and Yemen.
Symptoms
Mild form of Rift Valley Fever in humans
The interval from infection to onset of symptoms for Rift Valley fever (RVF) varies from 2 to 6 days. In its mild form, people who are infected with the virus either experience no detectable symptoms at all or develop a mild form of the disease characterized
by a feverish syndrome with sudden onset of flu-like fever, muscle pain, joint pain and headache. Some patients develop neck stiffness, sensitivity to light, loss of appetite and vomiting; in these patients the disease, in its early stages, may be
mistaken for meningitis. The symptoms of RVF usually last from 4 to 7 days.
Severe form of Rift Valley Fever in humans
While most human cases are relatively mild, a small percentage of patients develop a much more severe form of the disease. This usually appears as one or more of three distinct syndromes: ocular (eye) disease (0.5-2% of patients), meningoencephalitis
(less than 1%) or haemorrhagic fever (less than 1%).
The total case fatality rate for RVF has varied widely between documented epidemics but, overall, has been less than 1%. Most fatalities occur in patients who develop the haemorrhagic icterus (jaundice) form of the disease.
Treatment
Diagnosis
Because the symptoms of Rift Valley fever (RVF) are varied and non-specific, clinical diagnosis is often difficult, especially early in the course of the disease. RVF is difficult to distinguish from other viral haemorrhagic fevers as well as from many
other diseases that cause fever, including malaria and typhoid fever. As such, definitive diagnosis requires laboratory testing.
Treatment
As most human cases of RVF are relatively mild and of short duration, patients with this form of the disease require no specific treatment. For the more severe cases, the predominant treatment is general supportive therapy.
An inactivated vaccine has been developed for human use. However, it is not licensed or commercially available. It has been used experimentally to protect veterinary and laboratory personnel at high risk of exposure to RVF. Other candidate vaccines are
under investigation.
During an outbreak of RVF, close contact with animals and their body fluids has been identified as the most significant risk factor for RVF virus infection. Risk of animal-to-human transmission of infection can be reduced by avoiding unsafe animal husbandry
and slaughtering practices by maintaining good hygiene, and avoiding unsafe consumption of fresh blood, raw milk or animal tissue in affected regions.
Fact sheets
Rift Valley fever
Vector-borne diseases
Disease outbreak news
Latest disease outbreak news
Initiatives and groups
Emerging and Dangerous Pathogens Laboratory Network (EDPLN)
Training
Introduction to Rift Valley fever
Technical work
Disease outbreaks
Vector ecology and management
Risk communications and community engagement (RCCE)
News
All →
11 January 2024
Departmental update
Building collaborations and science capacity in Africa – Afrique One
Latest publications
All →
27 January 2023
Early warning alert and response (EWAR) in emergencies: an operational guide
Populations affected by emergencies are continually at risk of outbreaks of epidemic-prone diseases and other public health hazards. This operational guidance...
Download
Read More
14 May 2016
Mapping the Risk and Distribution of Epidemics in the WHO African Region
Disease epidemics result in substantial ill health and loss of lives and therefore pose a threat to global
health security, undermine socio-economic lives...
Download
Read More
30 September 2008
Rift Valley fever outbreaks forecasting models: joint FAO-WHO experts consultation, Rome, Italy, 29 September-1...
FAO and WHO invited a group of experts on the Rift Valley Fever (RVF) modelling and forecasting to
a two-day Rift Valley fever outbreak forecasting models...
Download
Read More
18 May 2007
Outbreaks of Rift Valley fever in Kenya, Somalia and United Republic of Tanzania, December 2006–April...
Download
Read More
Our work
WHO Foresight: Monitoring emerging technologies and building futures-thinking
Prioritizing diseases for research and development in emergency contexts
Streamlining operational R&D response during outbreaks
Infographics
Infographic
Geographic distribution of Rift Valley fever outbreak
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever
Communicable diseases
Ebola virus disease
Communicable diseases
Lassa fever
Communicable diseases
Nipah virus infection
Related links
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations (FAO)
World Organization for Animal Health (OIE)