Hepatitis
Skip to main content
Overview
Hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver that is caused by a
variety of infectious viruses and non-infectious
agents leading to a range of health problems, including severe liver damage and cancer, some of which can be fatal. There
are 5 main strains of the hepatitis virus, referred to as types A, B, C, D
and E. While they can all cause liver disease, they differ in important ways
including modes of transmission, severity of the illness, geographical
distribution and prevention methods.
In particular, types B and C lead to
chronic disease in hundreds of millions of people and together are the most
common cause of liver cirrhosis, liver cancer and viral hepatitis-related
deaths. They are among the main infectious disease killers, causing an estimated 1.3 million deaths per year. An estimated 304 million people worldwide live with hepatitis B or C,
and for most, testing and treatment remain beyond reach.
WHO’s
Global Health Sector Strategy on HIV, Viral Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections (2022–2030)
outlines clear targets to eliminate viral hepatitis as a public health problem. The strategy aims to reduce new hepatitis infections to 520 000 cases annually and hepatitis-related deaths to 450 000 by 2030, which represents a 90% reduction in incidence and a 65% reduction in mortality compared to 2015. Without urgent and sustained action, however, viral hepatitis is projected to cause an additional 9.5 million new infections, 2.1 million liver cancer cases, and 2.8 million deaths by 2030. These outcomes are largely preventable through the scale-up of hepatitis B vaccination, improved access to prevention, testing and treatment for hepatitis B and C, and targeted public education campaigns to raise awareness and reduce transmission
Symptoms
Many people with hepatitis A, B, C, D or E exhibit only mild symptoms or no symptoms at all. Each form of the virus, however, can cause more severe symptoms; notable is hepatitis E infection in pregnant women. Symptoms of viral hepatitis  may include fever, malaise, loss of appetite, diarrhoea, nausea, abdominal discomfort, dark-coloured urine and jaundice (a yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes). Hepatitis B, C and D virus can also cause a chronic liver infection that can later develop into cirrhosis (a scarring of the liver) or liver cancer. These patients are at risk of premature death.
Hepatitis D (HDV) is only found in people already infected with hepatitis B (HBV); however, the dual infection of HBV and HDV can cause a more serious infection and accelerated progression to cirrhosis and cancer. HBV, HCV and HDV cause hepatocellular carcinoma and are considered carcinogenic.
Treatment
Safe and effective vaccines are available to prevent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, and when given at birth, as part of the childhood vaccination series, strongly reduces the risk of transmission from mother to child. Hepatitis B vaccination also protects against hepatitis D virus (HDV) infection. Chronic HBV infection can be treated with antiviral agents. Treatment can slow the progression of cirrhosis, reduce incidence of liver cancer and improve long term survival. Only a proportion of people with chronic HBV infection will require treatment. A vaccine also exists to prevent infections of hepatitis A (HAV) and E (HEV). It is advised to avoid unnecessary medications due to the negative effect on liver function caused by these infections.
Hepatitis C (HCV) can cause both acute and chronic infection. Chronic HCV infection can lead to long-term complications, including cirrhosis or cancer. There is no vaccine for HCV. Antiviral medicines can cure more than 95% of persons with HCV infection, thereby reducing the risk of death from cirrhosis and liver cancer, but access to diagnosis and treatment remains globally low.
HAV and HEV are most common in low- and middle-income countries due to reduced access to clean and safe water sources and the increased risk of contaminated food. A safe and effective vaccine is available to prevent HAV and HEV infections. Most HAV and HEV infections are mild, with the majority of people recovering fully and developing immunity to further infection. However, these infections can also be severe and life threatening due to the risk of liver failure.
Fact sheets
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis D
Hepatitis E
Immunization coverage
Questions and answers
What is hepatitis?
Severe acute hepatitis of unknown cause in children
Preventing mother-to-child transmission of the hepatitis B virus
Guidelines
Guidelines on hepatitis
Databases and tools
Global reporting system for hepatitis
Viral hepatitis country profiles
Disease outbreak news
Acute hepatitis of unknown aetiology
Resolutions and decisions
Global health sector strategies on, respectively, HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, for the period 2022–2030 (WHA75.20)
WHA67.6: hepatitis
WHA63.18: viral hepatitis
Technical work
Global Hepatitis Programme
News
All →
13 October 2025
News release
Maldives becomes the first country to achieve ‘triple elimination’ of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
10 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO announces the development of guidelines on multiplex testing
28 July 2025
News release
WHO urges action on hepatitis, announcing hepatitis D as carcinogenic
23 July 2025
Departmental update
First-ever guidance for Triple Elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
15 July 2025
Departmental update
Integrating HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections with primary health care: learning from countries
15 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO prequalifies the first triple diagnostic test for HIV, hepatitis B and syphilis, a milestone toward global disease elimination goals
15 July 2025
Joint News Release
Global childhood vaccination coverage holds steady, yet over 14 million infants remain unvaccinated – WHO, UNICEF
19 May 2025
Departmental update
HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections agenda at the Seventy-eighth World Health Assembly
22 April 2025
Departmental update
WHO’s rapid response to sustain HIV, hepatitis and STI services
26 March 2025
Departmental update
New study highlights the potential impact of funding cuts on the HIV response
27 February 2025
Departmental update
Protecting key populations from abrupt disruptions to essential HIV services
13 February 2025
Departmental update
Public notice and comment on new members of the Global Validation Advisory Committee (GVAC)
5 December 2024
Departmental update
Priorities in planning hepatitis B and C testing services: new operational guide
5 November 2024
Departmental update
WHO e-courses on HIV, hepatitis and STIs national strategic planning and programme reviews
19 July 2024
Departmental update
WHO updates HIV testing guidance: more self-testing, integration, and prevention support
19 July 2024
Departmental update
Antiretrovirals in Pregnancy Research Toolkit
10 July 2024
News release
WHO prequalifies the first self-test for hepatitis C virus
21 May 2024
News release
New report flags major increase in sexually transmitted infections,
amidst challenges in HIV and hepatitis
14 May 2024
Departmental update
Elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and syphilis in Belize, Jamaica and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
9 May 2024
Departmental update
WHO awards Namibia for milestone achievement towards path to elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and hepatitis B
Publications
All →
19 November 2025
Integrated drug resistance action framework for HIV, hepatitis B and C and sexually transmitted infections,...
The
Integrated Drug Resistance Action Framework for HIV, Hepatitis B and C,
and Sexually Transmitted Infections (2026–2030) outlines a unified...
Download
Read More
13 October 2025
Opioid agonist maintenance treatment as an essential health service: implementation guidance on mitigating...
Opioid agonist maintenance treatment (OAMT) for people with opioid dependence is proven to be safe and effective in addressing a broad range of health...
Download
Read More
14 July 2025
Country guidance for planning triple elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and...
This publication provides guidance for planning country-specific programming to achieve the triple elimination of mother-to-child (or vertical) transmission...
Download
Read More
14 July 2025
Integrating HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections with primary health care – Learning...
Countries
are navigating major challenges and emerging opportunities in funding
and delivering HIV, viral hepatitis, and STIs (HHS) services, with...
Download
Read More
World Hepatitis Day 2025
Let's break it down!
Visit the campaign page
→
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Deaths from viral hepatitis-related causes are increasing.
Infographic
Most countries overpay for viral hepatitis medicines.
Infographic
Of the 304 million people living with hepatitis B and C, only 7 million are treated for hepatitis B and 12.5 million people for hepatitis C.
Infographic
Most people with chronic viral hepatitis don't realize they have it.
Videos
All →
10 March 2025
Transforming WHO: Tackling HIV in challenging times with Dr Meg Doherty
28 July 2024
World Hepatitis Day 2024 – It’s time for action
10 May 2023
WHO guidelines for key populations: what is new and what is important
27 July 2022
Bringing hepatitis care closer to communities
Feature stories
All →
18 March 2025
One man’s dream of a hepatitis-free Tanzania
20 December 2024
Lusophone countries united to eliminate HIV, hepatitis, STIs and TB by 2030
29 November 2024
Rosa’s HIV journey - the transformative power of advocacy and community engagement
WHO Youtube Channel
Hepatitis: WHO videos playlis
Related topics
Communicable diseases
HIV
Diseases and conditions
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Other
Universal health coverage