Noncommunicable diseases
Skip to main content
Overview
Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), including heart disease, stroke, cancer, diabetes and chronic lung disease, are collectively responsible for 74% of all deaths worldwide. More than three-quarters of all NCD deaths, and 86% of the 17 million people who died prematurely, or before reaching 70 years of age, occur in low- and middle-income countries.
NCDs share five major risk factors: tobacco use, physical inactivity, the harmful use of alcohol, unhealthy diets and air pollution.
The epidemic of NCDs poses devastating health consequences for individuals, families and communities, and threatens to overwhelm health systems. The socioeconomic costs associated with NCDs make the prevention and control of these diseases a major development imperative for the 21st century.
WHO’s mission is to provide leadership and the evidence base for international action on surveillance, prevention and control of NCDs. Urgent government action is needed to meet global targets to reduce the burden of NCDs.
Prevention and control
One of the most important ways of reducing deaths from noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) is to control the risk factors that lead to their development. These include reducing the use of tobacco and the harmful use of alcohol, maintaining an active lifestyle and consuming a healthy diet, and improving air quality. Actions towards these goals are cost-effective ways for countries to reduce the number of NCD deaths. Tackling these risk factors can not only save lives, but also provide a huge economic boost for countries.
Beyond prevention, management of NCDs is critical. This includes detection, screening and treatment of the diseases, as well as palliative care for those in need. The vast majority of premature deaths from NCDs occur in low- and middle-income countries, where universal health coverage or access to health care services is often limited. The development and promotion of universal health coverage is therefore essential in tackling NCDs and working to reduce the number of preventable global deaths.
Surveillance of NCDs is another vital action for providing the information needed for policy and programme development for NCD prevention and control. Tracking and reporting on NCD related global targets and indicators to understand progress in NCD prevention and control are key activities. Accurate data from countries are vital to reverse the global rise in death and disability from NCDs, to support evidence-based decision making, and to help monitor and evaluate the progress being made.
WHO response
The WHO Department of Noncommunicable Diseases is responsible for global leadership, coordination, guidance and technical support to reduce premature mortality and morbidity from NCDs. In 2019, the World Health Assembly extended the WHO Global action plan for the prevention and control of NCDs 2013–2020 to 2030. It called for the development of an Implementation Roadmap 2023–2030 to accelerate progress on preventing and controlling NCDs. The Implementation Roadmap supports actions to achieve a set of  9 global targets with the greatest impact towards prevention and management of NCDs.
Noncommunicable diseases are recognized as a major global challenge in the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Agenda sets the target of reducing premature deaths from NCDs by one third by 2030. WHO plays a key leadership role in the coordination and promotion of the global fight against NCDs and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals target 3.4.
Fact sheets
Noncommunicable diseases
Databases and tools
NCD data portal
Global health observatory (GHO)
NCD microdata repository
Questions and answers
Noncommunicable diseases
Initiatives and groups
Global NCD compact 2020–2030
Global Group of Heads of State and Government for the Prevention and Control of NCDs
High-level policy expert group of the SIDS ministerial conference on NCDs and mental health
Resolutions and decisions
WHA53.17: Prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases
WHA56.1: WHO Framework convention on tobacco control
WHA61.14: Prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases: implementation of the global strategy
Technical work
Noncommunicable Diseases, Rehabilitation and Disability
Global Noncommunicable Diseases Platform
News
All →
26 September 2025
News release
World leaders show strong support for political declaration on noncommunicable diseases and mental health
26 September 2025
Departmental update
Countries and global leaders recognized for their action to tackle the obesity crisis
25 September 2025
Departmental update
Leaving no one behind: a call to advance noncommunicable diseases and mental health equity for migrants and refugees at UNGA80
23 September 2025
News release
Uncontrolled high blood pressure puts over a billion people at risk
Latest publications
All →
8 October 2025
Reporting on the world’s biggest killers: a journalist’s guide to covering noncommunicable diseases
Reporting on the world’s biggest killers: a journalist’s guide to covering noncommunicable diseases, a new publication from WHO that is packed...
Download
Read More
5 June 2025
Noncommunicable diseases progress monitor 2025
The fifth in a series, the World Health Organization's 2025 Noncommunicable Diseases (NCD) Progress Monitor provides a snapshot of country progress toward...
Download
Read More
12 May 2025
Assessing national capacity for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases: report on 2023...
To assess national-level responses to NCDs, WHO has implemented NCD country capacity surveys periodically since 2001. This report is the latest in that...
Download
Read More
28 January 2025
Tracking progress on the implementation of the Global oral health action plan 2023–2030: baseline report
The aim of this report is to provide a comprehensive baseline assessment on the global oral health targets to track implementation progress of the Global...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Reducing population sodium/salt intake
Preventing noncommunicable diseases
Integrated management of NCDs
Strengthening NCD integration in humanitarian emergencies
Feature stories
All →
23 October 2025
Health in every community: caring for people with noncommunicable diseases in Viet Nam
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
27 February 2025
Integrating NCD diagnosis into remote primary care in the Maldives
29 January 2025
UHC-Partnership: Kyrgyzstan controls the prices of essential medicines in pursuit of health for all
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Core projects under the CureALL framework of the Global Initiative for Childhood Cancers
Infographic
Access education resources
Infographic
Set of nine voluntary global NCD targets for 2025
Infographic
Global monitoring framework
Videos
All →
18 September 2025
WHO press conference on global health issues – 18 September 2025
25 June 2025
The #SilentKillers: Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs)
22 November 2024
South Sudan: Refugees and noncommunicable diseases
22 November 2024
Kidney disease in Sudan: from crisis to resilience
Events
All →
GCM Participant Gathering. Beyond HLM4: Implementing through collaboration
24 – 25 November 2025
Launch of WHO guideline on fortification of edible oils and fats with vitamins A and D for public health
17 November 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
Launch of WHO journalist’s guide on the world’s biggest killers
8 October 2025 14:30 – 15:30 CET
Fourth High-level Meeting of the UN General Assembly on the prevention and control of NCDs and the promotion of mental health and wellbeing (HLM4)
25 September 2025
Spotlights
NCDs: The SilentKillers
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Physical environment
Air pollution
Other
Alcohol
Non-communicable diseases
Cancer
Diseases and conditions
Cardiovascular diseases
Non-communicable diseases
Chronic respiratory diseases
Diseases and conditions
Diabetes
Human behaviour
Healthy diet
Health systems
Palliative care
Human behaviour
Physical activity
Substances
Tobacco