Urban health
Skip to main content
Overview
Urbanization is one of the leading global trends of the 21st century that has a significant impact on health. Over 55% of the world’s population live in urban areas – a proportion that is expected to increase to 68% by 2050. As most future
urban growth will take place in developing countries, the world today has a unique opportunity to guide urbanization and other major urban development trends in a way that protects and promotes health. This is important, not least because the health
and well-being of citizens is perhaps a city’s most important asset.
However, most of the 4.2 billion people living in cities suffer inadequate housing and transport, poor sanitation and waste management, and air quality that fails WHO guidelines. Other forms of pollution, such as noise, water and soil contamination,
so-called urban heat islands, and a lack of space for walking, cycling and active living further combine to make cities epicentres of a noncommunicable disease epidemic and drivers of climate change.
WHO Repository on Urban Health
Impact
Around 40% of urban growth is in slums that lack safe water and sanitation, and 91% of people in urban areas breathe polluted air. When it comes to healthy diets, urbanization increases the distance from farm to fork, driving demand for unhealthy, processed foods. Urban dwellers are also highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change because of their dependence on fossil fuels for transport, cooking and heating. Cities account for over two thirds of the world’s energy and emit 60% of greenhouse gases, and those inland may experience temperatures 3–5º C higher than surrounding rural areas because of their large expanses of concrete and limited open green spaces.
All of this puts urban dwellers’ health at risk. Most the top 10 causes of death are closely related to rapid and unplanned urbanization, and poor urban design and planning. Cities face the triple health burden of infectious diseases like HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, pneumonia, dengue and diarrhoea; noncommunicable diseases like heart disease, stroke, asthma, cancer, diabetes and depression; and violence and injuries, including road traffic injuries.
WHO response
Despite their challenges, cities can create opportunities for better health, cleaner environments and climate action. Strong urban policies must prioritize health, as it is essential for fostering good urban livelihoods, building a productive workforce, creating resilient and vibrant communities, enabling mobility, promoting social interaction and protecting vulnerable populations.
WHO’s approach to urban health focuses on better air quality, water and sanitation, and other environmental determinants; healthy urban planning; healthier and smoke-free environments; safe and healthy mobility; preventing violence and injuries; promoting healthy food systems and diets; environmental management of vector-borne diseases; and urban preparedness for emergencies.
Working across sectors and ensuring the coherence of policies across different areas is key to creating supportive and enabling environments for health, which ensures that health and equity considerations are integrated throughout the planning process, investments and policy decisions at the local level.
To help Member States address the above priorities, WHO works to strengthen the evidence base to help policy-makers make informed decisions when addressing health risks. It provides tools and guidance on what works, and supports monitoring of key health-related indicators. WHO leads and engages in fostering city-to-city exchanges and helps develop institutional and policy frameworks for good urban governance for health and well-being in cities.
Fact sheets
Urban health
Databases and tools
WHO Repository on Urban Health
WHO Global Ambient Air Quality Database
Health Economic Assessment Tool (HEAT) for walking and cycling
Resolutions and decisions
WHA44.27: Resolution on Urban Health Development
WHA68.8 Health and the environment: addressing the health impact of air pollution
WHA75/CONF.2: Resolution on "Strengthening health emergency preparedness and response in cities and urban settings"
WPRO Resolution on Urban Health (RC66)
PAHO Strategy and Plan of Action on Urban Health (CD51)
Technical work
Urban Health
Social Determinants of Health
Environment, Climate Change and Health
Health Promotion
News
All →
3 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO hosts first online training on the Urban Health Capacity Assessment and Response Resource Kit
1 November 2024
Departmental update
Action over perfection: a Cape Town epidemiologist's experience at WHO
31 October 2024
Departmental update
On World Cities Day 2024, WHO releases tools to foster healthier cities for empowered youth
31 October 2024
Departmental update
New WHO report shows how cities are driving progress in preventing NCDs and injuries
Publications
All →
27 October 2025
Taking a strategic approach to urban health: a guide for decision-makers
Governments face complex health challenges shaped by the evolving interactions of people and institutions with urban environments; these are compounded...
Download
Read More
17 May 2025
Urban health capacities assessment and response: Health-promoting land rights planning for urban food...
Assessing and using capacities that create synergies across sectors and levels of governance can significantly improve urban health and well-being. The...
Download
Read More
23 April 2025
Urban health capacities assessment and response: health-promoting urban food systems in Kwekwe, Zimbabwe
Assessing and using capacities that create synergies across sectors and levels of governance can significantly improve urban health and well-being. The...
Download
Read More
27 November 2024
Urban health capacities assessment and response: preventing falls among older people in Utrecht, the...
Assessing and using capacities that create synergies across sectors and levels of governance can significantly improve urban health and well-being. The...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Supporting countries to implement and monitor urban health policies
Strengthening partnerships and city networks to address urban health
Providing cross-cutting solutions to improve health in urban areas
Developing an urban health research agenda
Campaign
World Cities Day
31 October
Events
All →
Launch of "Taking a strategic approach to urban health: a guide for decision-makers"
31 October 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
2025
World Cities Day 2025: People-centred smart cities
31 October 2025
Fact in pictures
6 December 2019
Urban settings as a social determinant of health
24 May 2019
Why urban health matters
Infographics
All →
Infographic
500 actions to take, including 20 practical steps to improve urban mobility and transport systems
Infographic
500 actions to take, including 30 ways to create safer environments that prevent drownings, falls and burns
Infographic
500 actions to take, including 30 practical steps to create safer housing and build healthier cities
Infographic
Healthy environments: Cities
Videos
All →
22 March 2024
Clean air & energy for health webinar #4 - Cleaner air through better places
19 April 2023
Why are national programmes for age-friendly cities and communities important? – Perspectives from Poland and beyond
27 October 2022
Tobacco: Cape Town (South Africa) advocates against tobacco pollution and for smoke free spaces
6 July 2022
Becoming an Age-Friendly City or Community
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Ageing
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Human behaviour
Physical activity
Physical environment
Air pollution
Socio-political determinants
Social determinants of health
Physical environment
Road traffic injuries
Disasters
Climate change
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
Populations and demographics
Refugee and migrant health