Complementary feeding
Skip to main content
Overview
Around the age of 6 months, an infant’s need for energy and nutrients starts to exceed what is provided by breast milk, and complementary foods are necessary to meet those needs. An infant of this age is also developmentally ready for other foods.
This transition is referred to as complementary feeding.
If complementary foods are not introduced around the age of 6 months, or if they are given inappropriately, an infant’s growth may falter.
Ensuring that infants nutritional needs are met requires that complementary foods be:
timely
– meaning that they are introduced when the need for energy and nutrients exceeds what can be provided through exclusive breastfeeding;
adequate
– meaning that they provide sufficient energy, protein and micronutrients to meet a growing child’s nutritional needs;
safe
– meaning that they are hygienically stored and prepared, and fed with clean hands using clean utensils and not bottles and teats;
properly fed
– meaning that they are given consistent with a child’s signals of appetite and satiety, and that meal frequency and feeding are suitable for age.
Caregivers should take active care in the feeding of infants by being responsive to the child’s clues for hunger and also encouraging the child to eat.
Recommendation
WHO recommends that infants start receiving complementary foods at 6 months of age in addition to breast milk. Initially, they should receive complementary foods 2–3 times a day between 6–8 months and increase to 3–4 times daily between 9–11 months and 12–24 months. Additional nutritious snacks should also be offered 1–2 times per day for ages 12–24 months, as desired.
Gradually increase food consistency and variety as the infant gets older, adapting to the infant’s requirements and abilities. Infants can eat pureed, mashed and semi-solid foods beginning at 6 months. By 8 months most infants can also eat “finger foods” (snacks that can be eaten by children alone).
By 12 months, most children can eat the same types of foods as consumed by the rest of the family, while keeping in mind the need for nutrient-dense foods, including animal-sourced foods like meat, poultry, fish, eggs and dairy products.
Avoid foods in a form that may cause choking, such as whole grapes or raw carrots. Avoid giving drinks with low nutrient value, such as tea, coffee and sugary soft drinks. Limit the amount of juice offered, to avoid displacing more nutrient-rich foods.
WHO response
WHO is committed to support countries with implementation and monitoring of the "
Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutrition
”, which includes 6 targets, including reducing the number of children under-5 who are stunted by 40% by 2025. The "
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding
", also aims to protect, promote and support appropriate infant and young child feeding.
Appropriate complementary feeding depends on accurate information and skilled support from the family, community and health care system. WHO works with Member States to ensure key populations have adequate knowledge about appropriate foods and feeding practices in order to prevent malnutrition.
WHO developed the guide "
Complementary feeding: family foods for breastfed children
", which gives more detailed guidance for health workers on how to support complementary feeding. The guidelines are also included as part of WHO’s Infant and young child feeding counselling course and the Complementary feeding counselling course for health workers.
Fact sheets
Infant and young child feeding
Questions and answers
5 keys to a healthy diet
Up to what age can a baby stay well nourished by just being breastfed?
Why can’t we give water to a breastfeeding baby before the 6 months, even when it is hot?
Databases
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions (eLENA)
WHO global targets tracking tool
Resolutions and decisions
WHA73(26) Maternal, infant and young child nutrition
WHA71.9 Infant and young child feeding
WHA69.8 United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025)
WHA 69.9 Ending inappropriate promotion of foods for infants and young child
Technical work
Food and Nutrition Actions in Health Systems
Nutrition and Food Safety
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health, and Ageing
News
All →
4 August 2025
Joint News Release
On World Breastfeeding Week, countries urged to invest in health systems and support breastfeeding mothers
1 August 2025
Joint News Release
Breastfeeding in Indonesia on the rise, but mothers need more support
18 June 2025
Departmental update
Equity and health: the inclusion of pregnant and breastfeeding women in clinical trials
26 March 2025
Departmental update
United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025) extended to 2030
Our works
Measuring child growth through data
Promoting baby-friendly hospitals
Events
All →
From assessment to action: Implementing WBTi to strengthen national breastfeeding policies
3 July 2025 15:00 – 16:30 CET
Adolescent obesity management guidelines: eighth Guideline Development Group meeting
5 – 6 February 2025
Childhood obesity management guidelines: eighth Guideline Development Group meeting
3 – 4 February 2025
Publications
All →
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: topical briefs on maternal, infant and young child nutrition
Recognizing that the world is not on track to meet all of the 2025 global nutrition targets, WHO Member States, during the 78th World Health Assembly in...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: child wasting brief
Wasting, or being too thin for one’s age, is defined as a weight-for-height that is more than two standard deviations below the World Health Organization...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: breastfeeding brief
Exclusive breastfeeding – defined as the practice of only giving an infant breast-milk for the first 6 months of life (no other food or water) –...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: childhood overweight brief
Children aged 0 to 5 years are classified as overweight if their weight-for-length/height or BMI-for-age falls over 2 standard deviations above the median...
Download
Read More
Training
13 December 2021
Infant and young child feeding counselling: an integrated course: trainer’s guide, 2nd ed
Breastfeeding and appropriate, safe, and timely complementary feeding are fundamental to the health and development of children and important for the health...
Download
Read More
15 October 2021
Infant and young child feeding counselling: an integrated course: course handouts
Breastfeeding and appropriate, safe, and timely complementary feeding are fundamental to the health and development of children and important for the health...
Download
Read More
Facts in pictures
20 February 2018
Breastfeeding
Features
2 August 2016
Viet Nam breastfeeding campaign normalizes practice, improves rates
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Investing in breastfeeding means investing in the future
Infographic
48% of infants under 6 months old are exclusively breastfed
Infographic
Listen, support, empower: WHO recommends at least 6 contacts with a breastfeeding counsellor
Infographic
Breast-Milk is the first superfood
Videos
All →
4 March 2024
WHO's department of nutrition and food safety: key achievements 2023
9 March 2022
How the marketing of formula milk influences our decisions on infant feeding: DG's remarks
9 March 2022
How the marketing of formula milk influences our decisions on infant feeding - Women's Voices
9 March 2022
WHO/UNICEF report: How the marketing of formula milk influences our decisions on infant feeding
Related health topics
Health interventions
Breastfeeding
Health interventions
Infant nutrition
Populations and demographics
Newborn health
Commentaries
1 August 2019
Empower parents, enable breastfeeding