Quality of care
Skip to main content
Overview
Quality of care is the degree to which health services for individuals and populations increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes.  It is based on evidence-based professional knowledge and is critical for achieving universal health coverage.
As countries commit to achieving Health for All, it is imperative to carefully consider the quality of care and health services.  Quality health care can be defined in many ways but there is growing acknowledgement that quality health services
should be:
Effective
– providing evidence-based healthcare services to those who need them;
Safe
– avoiding harm to people for whom the care is intended; and
People-centred
– providing care that responds to individual preferences, needs and values.
To realize the benefits of quality health care, health services must be:
Timely
– reducing waiting times and sometimes harmful delays;
Equitable
– providing care that does not vary in quality on account of gender, ethnicity, geographic location, and socio-economic status;
Integrated
– providing care that makes available the full range of health services throughout the life course;
Efficient
– maximizing the benefit of available resources and avoiding waste.
In practice
The Sustainable Development Goals urge countries to achieve Universal Health Coverage (UHC), including financial risk protection and access to
quality
essential health care services. However, the reality in many settings is that providing quality care remains a significant challenge, and inadequate quality results in avoidable mortality, human suffering and significant economic losses.
While challenges to improving the quality of care are substantial, the need for action is clear, and many countries are making progress to build quality into their health systems. The WHO-World Bank-OECD report
–  Delivering quality health services
– highlights the need for action across multiple stakeholders at all health system levels. The provision of quality services requires good governance; a skilled and competent health workforce that is supported and motivated; financing mechanisms that enable and encourage quality care; information systems that continuously monitor and learn to drive better care; medicines, devices and technologies that are available, safe and appropriately regulated; and accessible and well-equipped healthcare facilities.
WHO, World Bank and the OECD have proposed a series of actions from key constituencies – governments, health systems, citizens and patients, and health workers – that need to work together to achieve the goal of quality health service delivery at the front line.
Key messages
UHC cannot be achieved      without attention to quality of care in all settings including those experiencing fragility, conflict      and vulnerability.
Quality health services      should be: effective; safe; people-centred; timely; equitable; integrated;      and efficient.
Improving the quality of      health services requires strong national direction from governments,      focused sub-national support, and action at the health facility level.      Across all levels there is a need for engagement and empowerment of the      communities served by the health system.
National policies and      strategies aimed at improving quality of care provide a strong foundation      for improving quality across the health system and need to be closely      aligned with broader national health policy and planning.
Quality needs to be      continually measured and monitored to drive improvement, which relies on      accurate, timely and actionable data.
Improving the quality of      health services requires attention to knowledge generation and learning.      Lessons on delivery of quality care should be systematically captured,      documented and shared within and between countries.
Major public health      crises – such as outbreaks of highly infectious diseases – are a priority      for countries. For health systems to be resilient, they require quality      health services that are delivered prior to, maintained during, and      improved upon following a public health emergency.
Fact sheets
Quality health services
Patient safety
Questions and answers
WHO handbook for national quality policy and strategy
Resolutions and decisions
WHA72.6 Global action plan on patient safety
WHA69.11 Health in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
A72/12 Primary Health Care towards UHC
WHA69.24 Strengthening integrated, people-centred health services
Technical work
Quality health services
Integrated Health Services
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
Quality of care: Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health, and Ageing
News
All →
5 November 2025
Departmental update
Scaling up family planning approaches
5 October 2025
Joint News Release
Global health agencies issue new recommendations to help end deaths from postpartum haemorrhage
3 September 2025
Departmental update
Bridging global guidance and local action for maternal and newborn health
7 August 2025
Departmental update
WHO and partners launch global guide to advance respectful maternal and newborn care
Publications
All →
3 November 2025
Selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 4th ed.
This document is part of the process for improving the quality of care in family planning. Selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use (SPR)...
Download
Read More
3 November 2025
Medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use, 6th ed.
This document is part of the process for improving the quality of care in family planning. Medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use (MEC) presents...
Download
Read More
5 October 2025
Bleeding after birth: course on prevention, diagnosis and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
The Bleeding after birth training course aims to translate standards into care. It incorporates the latest WHO recommendations related to PPH and includes...
Download
Read More
5 October 2025
Consolidated guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage
Despite the existence of proven interventions for preventing, diagnosing and treating postpartum haemorrhage (PPH), effective implementation of evidence-based...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
23 September 2025
New digital tools expand access and enhance quality in comprehensive abortion care
22 September 2025
Transforming abortion care starts with education
17 September 2025
Improving quality of medicines for maternal health: what can parliamentarians do?
7 August 2025
Prioritizing respectful care for pregnant women, mothers and babies
Infographics
All →
Infographic
More than one-third of women experience long-term health problems after childbirth
Infographic
Inequalities across borders and within countries threaten newborn health
Infographic
Every 7 seconds, a woman or newborn dies, or a baby is lost to stillbirth
Infographic
Without a change of course, 30 million preventable deaths from childbirth are projected to occur by 2030
Videos
All →
5 June 2025
Improving quality of care to save lives in Sierra Leone
5 December 2024
Strengthening community engagement for health and well-being
18 August 2023
Improving quality of care for maternal, newborn and child health services in Malawi
5 April 2023
How to make your pregnancy safer? Panel discussion on Pre-eclampsia from WHO's film festival winner
Related health topics
Populations and demographics
Child health
Health systems
Infection prevention and control
Populations and demographics
Maternal health
Health systems
Patient safety
Health systems
Primary health care
Other
Universal health coverage
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)