Infant nutrition
Skip to main content
Overview
Proper infant nutrition is fundamental to a child’s continued health, from birth through adulthood. Correct feeding in the first three years of life is particularly important due to its role in lowering morbidity and mortality, reducing the risk of chronic disease throughout their life span, and promoting regular mental and physical development.
Although every infant and child has the right to good nutrition under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, in many countries less than a fourth of infants have access to the required dietary diversity and feeding frequency. Inappropriate feeding practices contribute up to a third of all cases of child malnutrition. This is compounded by the proliferation of processed foods like infant formula and products rich in salt, free sugars and trans fats. This causes an increase in poor diets, obesity and a marked reduction in the number of mothers breastfeeding their babies. Breastfeeding has been shown to be of critical importance to a child’s development, including increased IQ, school performance and higher income in adult life.
WHO continues to work with Member States and partners to promote proper infant and child nutrition, including breastfeeding information campaigns and efforts to prevent malnutrition at the local, national, and international levels.
Learn about Nutrition and Food Safety and COVID-19
Impact
Malnutrition affects over 2 billion people worldwide, and the burden is felt disproportionately by people in low- and middle-income countries. Infants and children are particularly vulnerable, with most deaths due to malnutrition occurring in children under 5 years of age.
It is estimated that more than 144 million children under 5 are stunted (meaning too short for their age) and 47 million are wasted (too thin for their height). A further 38.3 million are overweight or obese. Undernutrition, which can occur alone or concurrently with obesity in what is called the double burden of malnutrition, is associated with 2.7 million child deaths each year, or 45% of all deaths in children.
Malnutrition in the early years of life can have long-lasting impacts on physical and mental development, which in turn affect a person’s educational performance and later employment opportunities. The extent of this issue is such that it has a sizable effect on economic markers in some countries and is considered a major global health problem.
Reducing the global burden
Reducing global malnutrition begins with a proper diet during pregnancy and correct breastfeeding of infants. WHO recommends breastfeeding babies exclusively for 6 months, with safe and complementary foods being added slowly until age two or beyond. This means babies should receive only breastmilk from the mother or wet nurse with no other liquids or solids, including water unless required (such as oral rehydration solutions or vitamin and mineral supplements).
With proper breastfeeding, it is estimated that over 820 000 children’s lives could be saved each year, with marked improvements in other development markers throughout the child’s life. Currently, only about 40% of infants are exclusively breastfed.
WHO works to implement the initiatives outlined in the
United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition 2016–2025
in collaboration with Member States and partners. The goals of the campaign include improving the nutritional status of the population in all areas, particularly in early life, by preventing and treating malnutrition among pregnant women and young children.
Fact sheets
Infant and young child feeding
Malnutrition
Newborns: improving survival and well-being
Questions and answers
Healthy diet: Keys to eating well
Breastfeeding
Questions and answers on COVID-19 and breastfeeding
What is malnutrition?
Database and tools
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions (eLENA)
Global database on the Implementation of Food and Nutrition Action (GIFNA)
Global targets tracking tool
Nutrition Landscape Information System (NLiS)
WHO Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition
Initiatives and groups
Expert Group for Updating Guidance on Indicators for the Assessment of Iodine Status
FAO/WHO nutrient requirements for children aged 0–4 years
UN Decade of Action on Nutrition
UNICEF/WHO Technical Advisory Group on Wasting and Nutritional Oedema (Acute Malnutrition)
Resolutions and decisions
WHA71.9 Infant and young child feeding
WHA69.9 Ending inappropriate promotion of foods for infants and young children
WHA65.6 Maternal, infant and young child nutrition
Technical work
Nutrition and Food Safety
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health and Ageing
News
All →
26 March 2025
Departmental update
United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025) extended to 2030
28 July 2023
Departmental update
Leadership Dialogue on Food Systems for People’s Nutrition and Health
7 July 2023
Departmental update
WHO and UNICEF release toolkit to help countries protect children from harmful food marketing
8 February 2023
Departmental update
Experts call for clampdowns on exploitative formula milk marketing in new Lancet series
Our work
Identifying common areas of progress with the Every Newborn Action Plan
Addressing critical knowledge gaps in newborn health
Promoting healthy pregnancy
Promoting baby-friendly hospitals
Events
All →
From assessment to action: Implementing WBTi to strengthen national breastfeeding policies
3 July 2025 15:00 – 16:30 CET
Adolescent obesity management guidelines: eighth Guideline Development Group meeting
5 – 6 February 2025
Childhood obesity management guidelines: eighth Guideline Development Group meeting
3 – 4 February 2025
Podcast
Episode #51 - Breastfeeding & COVID-19
If you have COVID-19, is it safe to breastfeed your baby? Is it safe to get vaccinated against COVID-19 if you are breastfeeding? How can you keep your baby safe while breastfeeding if you have COVID-19? Dr Laurence Grummer- Strawn explains in Science in 5.
Publications
All →
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: topical briefs on maternal, infant and young child nutrition
Recognizing that the world is not on track to meet all of the 2025 global nutrition targets, WHO Member States, during the 78th World Health Assembly in...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: breastfeeding brief
Exclusive breastfeeding – defined as the practice of only giving an infant breast-milk for the first 6 months of life (no other food or water) –...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: low birth weight brief
Low birth weight is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as weight at birth less than 2500 g (5.5 lb). Low birth weight continues to be a significant...
Download
Read More
24 September 2025
Infant and young child feeding: model chapter for textbooks for medical students and allied health professionals,...
The Model
Chapter, which was first published in 2009, brings together essential knowledge
about infant and young child feeding that health professionals...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Investing in breastfeeding means investing in the future
Infographic
Listen, support, empower: WHO recommends at least 6 contacts with a breastfeeding counsellor
Infographic
48% of infants under 6 months old are exclusively breastfed
Infographic
Breast-Milk is the first superfood
Videos
All →
4 March 2024
WHO's department of nutrition and food safety: key achievements 2023
9 March 2022
How the marketing of formula milk influences our decisions on infant feeding: DG's remarks
9 March 2022
How the marketing of formula milk influences our decisions on infant feeding - Women's Voices
9 March 2022
WHO/UNICEF report: How the marketing of formula milk influences our decisions on infant feeding
Feature story
30 May 2019
Tackling childhood anaemia in indigenous communities in Peru
Facts in pictures
20 February 2018
Breastfeeding
Related topics
Health interventions
Breastfeeding
Health and wellbeing
Child growth
Health interventions
Complementary feeding
Other
Food fortification
Diseases and conditions
Malnutrition
Populations and demographics
Newborn health