Human African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness)
Skip to main content
Overview
Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT), or sleeping sickness, is caused by trypanosome parasites that are transmitted by tsetse flies. HAT is found only in sub-Saharan Africa. Two subspecies of
Trypanosoma brucei
cause disease:
T. b. gambiense
in West and Central Africa, and
T. b. rhodesiense
in East Africa.
This life-threatening disease mostly affects poor rural populations, causing significant harm. Travellers to endemic regions may also be at risk of infection.
HAT transmission requires the interaction of humans, tsetse flies and parasite reservoirs (humans, and domestic and wild animals). The animal reservoir is very important in
T. b. rhodesiense
and less so in
T. b. gambiense
, although it could explain the long-term endemicity in some foci despite control interventions.
Transmission can be interrupted by depleting the parasite reservoirs through detection and treatment of infected people and/or domestic animals and by reducing the tsetse fly population and human–tsetse contact.
In 1995, about 25 000 cases were detected, 300 000 undetected cases were estimated and 60 million people were estimated to be at risk of HAT infection. In 2001, WHO launched an initiative to reinforce control and surveillance, and HAT decreased markedly in the ensuing years. Since 2019, fewer than 1000 cases are reported yearly. This reduction does not reflect a lack of control efforts as in general active and passive screening has been maintained at similar levels (around 2.5 million people screened per year).
Symptoms
After infection, trypanosomes multiply in the blood and lymph (first-stage, haemolymphatic) and, following a variable incubation period (from days to months), unspecific symptoms and signs such as headache, fever, weakness, joint pain, and lymphadenopathy appear. Over time, the parasites cross the blood–brain barrier to invade the central nervous system (second-stage, meningoencephalitic), causing various neurological disturbances including sleep disorders (excessive daytime sleepiness, nocturnal insomnia), deep sensory disturbances, abnormal movements, tremor, ataxia, walking difficulties, speech difficulties, psychiatric disorders, seizures, coma and ultimately death. Most signs and symptoms are common to both stages, and sleep disorders in particular can appear already during the first stage.
Rhodesiense HAT is typically acute, progressing to second-stage within a few weeks, and to death within 6 months. Gambiense HAT progresses slowly over around 3 years (highly variable).
An inoculation chancre (dermal reaction of 3–4 cm at the tsetse bite site) may appear 2–3 days after infection with rhodesiense HAT in up to 25% of local patients, but more frequently in patients from non-endemic regions. It is rare with gambiense HAT.
Sleeping sickness is diagnosed in several steps: after a clinical suspicion, serological tests (card agglutination trypanosomiasis test or HAT rapid diagnostic tests) can reinforce the suspicion, which should be confirmed by parasitological findings (in chancre exudate, lymphatic juice, blood and cerebrospinal fluid). Unfortunately, the usual serological tests are only applicable to
T. b. gambiense.
Stage is determined by the number of white blood cells and the presence of trypanosomes in cerebrospinal fluid examination.
Treatment
All confirmed HAT cases require treatment. Available treatment can cure most patients, completely eliminating trypanosomes from the body. Treatment of cases suspected by serology depends on specific conditions set by national protocols, which usually
set specific conditions defining a higher suspicion index.
The current treatment options include six medicines, all of which are donated by the manufacturers; WHO ensures their worldwide distribution free of charge.
Treatment choices are based on the causative trypanosome and the disease stage. The medicines for treatment of second-stage must cross the blood–brain barrier and tend to be more toxic and complex to administer than first-stage medicines.
In 2019, WHO issued
interim guidelines for treatment of gambiense HAT
. For treatment
of rhodesiense HAT,
the former guidelines
remain valid.
Gambiense HAT
can be treated with oral fexinidazole in first-stage and also non-severe second-stage, with some limitations of age and body weight and following some important specific rules to ensure efficacy. In first-stage, intramuscular
pentamidine can be also used, and in second stage nifurtimox–eflornithine combination therapy (NECT).
Rhodesiense HAT
must be treated without delay, because it can provoke multi-organ failure and progress to second stage within a few weeks. In first-stage, the treatment is intravenous suramin, with pentamidine as an alternative. In second-stage,
the only treatment is intravenous melarsoprol.
Fact sheets
Trypanosomiasis, human African (sleeping sickness)
Questions and answers
Frequently asked questions on sleeping sickness (human African trypanosomiasis)
Databases and tools
Distribution in disease-endemic countries
Risk of human African trypanosomiasis
Interactive graph for HAT (Global Health Observatory)
Number of reported cases (
T.b. gambiense
) GHO
Number of reported cases (
T.b. rhodesiense
) GHO
Resolutions and decisions
Control of human African trypanosomiasis, 2004
| WHA57.2
Pan African Tsetse and trypanosomiasis eradication campaign, 2003
| WHA56.7
African trypanosomiasis, 1997
| WHA50.36
African human trypanosomiasis, 1983
| WHA36.31
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
News
All →
4 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO and Bayer AG renew longstanding collaboration to eliminate three deadly neglected tropical diseases
8 August 2025
News release
Kenya achieves elimination of human African trypanosomiasis or sleeping sickness as a public health problem
7 February 2025
Departmental update
WHO delivers fexinidazole to Malawi and Zimbabwe – a long-awaited safer treatment for rhodesiense human African trypanosomiasis
29 January 2025
News release
Guinea eliminates human African trypanosomiasis as a public health problem
Our work
Mapping and tracking transmission until the elimination of human African trypanosomiasis
Coordinating partners and countries within one HAT network
Supporting research and innovation in human African trypanosomiasis
Supporting endemic countries to eliminate human African trypanosomiasis
Publications
All →
28 June 2024
Guidelines for the treatment of human African trypanosomiasis
These guidelines are providing updated evidence-based recommendations on
therapeutic choices to ensure the best possible treatment for individuals infected...
Download
Read More
17 May 2024
Human African trypanosomiasis eliminated as a public health problem in Chad
Chad was validated for the elimination of gambiense  HAT as a public health problem in April 2024, and the work continues towards interrupting transmission...
Download
Read More
External publications
Elimination of human African trypanosomiasis: The long last mile.
PloS Neglected Tropical Diseases. May 1, 2024, Pages 1-6
The elimination of human African trypanosomiasis: Monitoring progress towards the 2021–2030 WHO road map targets
PloS Neglected Tropical Diseases. April 16, 2024, Pages 1-22.
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for Human African trypanosomiasis
Events
All →
Eighth International Course on Trypanosomiasis in Africa (ICAT8)
23 September – 11 October 2024
Fifth WHO stakeholders meeting on human African trypanosomiasis elimination
7 – 9 June 2023
Call for
All →
6 December 2023
Call for consultation
Public notice and comments on the Guideline Development Group for WHO human African trypanosomiasis therapeutic guideline
22 September 2022
Call for consultation
Call for public consultation  ̶  Target Product Profile for two gambiense Human African Trypanosomiasis tests: (TPP3) individual test to assess infection in low prevalence settings; (TPP4) high-throughput test for verification of elimination
Multimedia
All →
11 November 2024
STR0gHAT Project - How to use KPS manufactured at the Biomedical Research Institute in Kinshasa
Contact
Dr. José Ramon Franco Minguell
Medical officer
francoj@who.int
Dr. Gerardo Priotto
Medical officer
priottog@who.int
neglected.diseases@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis)
Diseases and conditions
Dracunculiasis (Guinea-worm disease)
Diseases and conditions
Leishmaniasis
Diseases and conditions
Leprosy (Hansen disease)