Health Laws
Skip to main content
Overview
Law for Universal Health Coverage (UHC)
For all aspects of health, there are binding rules that govern the rights and responsibilities of governments, health workers, companies, civil society and a country’s population. Together these rules make up the legal framework, or legal architecture for health. They take many forms including: statutory laws, regulatory and administrative laws, contracts, case law, and customary laws. Who is involved in making these rules, and the form they take, differs from country to country.
Health laws are used to formalize commitment to goals, such as the goal of universal health coverage, creating a drive for action.  To enable cooperation and achieve health goals, people use law to create different organizations (such as hospitals) and relationships (such as contracts for providing health services). In turn, organizations (whether health ministries, the private sector or civil society) have mandates, policies and strategies based on legal rules that guide their work.
There are also many rules that structure what health organizations and individuals should do, and what they may not do. This interaction between different health laws results in health system functions being carried out and health products and services being delivered.
In practice
Governments use health laws for:
Establishing important health policy goals (including universal health coverage);
Implementing health policy;
Enabling the effective operation of key health system functions and regulating inputs (service provision, health workforce, medical products and technologies, financing, health information and governance);
Creating the health systems architecture, establishing health organizations and networks, establishing mandates, duties and accountabilities;
Managing and responding to risks to personal health and a country’s health security;
Applying international health agreements and development goals at country level;
Build strong foundations for good governance to enable meaningful participation by all types of individuals and health stakeholders, protect rights and define responsibilities, and
Establish predictable, appropriate and fair rules for facilitating the operation of health markets and setting norms for responsible health behavior.
More information
How does law create UHC?
By providing legal recognition of access rights to essential health services, essential medicines and vaccines and by removing legal access barriers to universal access including discrimination.
UHC can be defined as “the existence of a legal mandate for universal access to health services and evidence that the vast majority of the population has meaningful access to these services”. All countries that have achieved UHC have legislated to formalize the commitment UHC.
By ensuring financial protection. UHC financing reforms aimed at providing financial protection, rely on legal mechanisms.
Revenue raising, pooling, purchasing, and the definition of a countries benefit package all rely on law.
By assuring health care quality.
Six health care quality objectives are critical to efforts towards UHC: safety, equity, efficacy, patient centeredness, efficiency, timeliness, all rely on law for their achievement. Legal tools for UHC quality include: standard setting, licensing of health workers and products, accreditation of health services and facilities, clinical protocols, reporting systems, establishing monitoring and accountability mechanisms and processes, compliance monitoring, auditing and the use of sanctions.
Fact sheets
Universal health coverage (UHC)
Data
Health law by countries
WHO Resolution
Universal Health Coverage moving towards better health
Our work
Building capacity on legal matters
Collecting and disseminating legal information
Providing legal advisory services to Member States
Reducing health system corruption
Strengthening legal frameworks for UHC
Undertaking health law research
Working with parliamentarians to achieve UHC
News
18 October 2022
Note for Media
Parliamentarians commit to support global health
Feature stories
17 January 2017
New report offers global resource on using the law to improve health
Publications
All →
17 November 2020
Ending hospital detention for non-payment of bills: legal and health financing policy...
Uncounted numbers of people are detained in public and private hospitals around the world for non-payment of hospital bills, despite the fact that hospital...
Download
Read More
14 May 2025
Laws and regulations addressing the acceptability, availability and affordability of alcoholic beverages
The WHO Global alcohol action plan 2022-2030 aims to accelerate the implementation of high-impact interventions for alcohol consumption and related harm....
Download
Read More
7 September 2022
Regulations and Laws promoting health and well-being goals (SDG3) in WHO South-East Asian countries
All countries of the WHO SE Asia Region are making every effort to accelerate progress towards achieving Sustainable Development Goal 3 by 2030 for the...
Download
Read More
5 August 2021
Digital technology and COVID-19 in the Western Pacific Region
The use of digital technology as part of the response to the coronavirus disease 2019 (‎COVID-19)‎ highlights its potential to accelerate the achievement...
Download
Read More
5 August 2021
Considerations for health governance: strengthening institutional capacity and connectedness through...
Coronavirus disease 2019 (‎COVID-19)‎ requires effective whole-of-government and whole-of-society action and collaboration. Legal frameworks play...
Download
Read More
Multimedia
All →
18 June 2025
Alcoholic beverages: Laws & regulations about their acceptability, availability and affordability
29 September 2022
Health is all about people - It's time to invest in social participation!
15 December 2020
Webinar: a new WHO strategy for navigating private sector engagement for UHC
9 December 2020
Strategy - Engaging the private health sector through governance in mixed health systems
Related health topics
Health systems
Health systems governance
Other
Universal health coverage