Radon
Skip to main content
Overview
Radon is a naturally occurring radioactive gas. It has no smell, colour or taste, and is produced from the natural radioactive decay of uranium in rocks and soil. Radon can also be found in water.
Radon gas escapes easily from the ground into the air. Outdoors, radon quickly dilutes to very low concentrations and is generally not a problem. However, it tends to concentrate in enclosed spaces, such as underground mines, houses, and other buildings. Soil gas infiltration is recognized as the most important source of residential radon. Other sources of radon include building materials and water extracted from wells, but are of less importance.
Radon decays and produces further radioactive particles. As we breathe, the particles are deposited on the cells lining the airways, where they can damage DNA and potentially cause lung cancer.
Radon causes between 3–14% of all lung cancers, depending on the average radon level and the smoking prevalence in a country. Radon is much more likely to cause lung cancer in people who smoke: smokers are 25 times more at risk from radon than non-smokers.
Prevention
For most people, the greatest exposure to radon occurs in the home. The concentration of radon in a home depends on the amount of uranium in the underlying rocks and soils, the construction of the house and the ventilation habits of the inhabitants.
Radon levels can be measured in an inexpensive and simple manner.
Well-tested, durable and cost-efficient methods exist for preventing radon in new houses and reducing radon in existing dwellings. Radon prevention should be considered when new houses are built, particularly in radon prone areas. Radon levels in existing homes can be reduced by, for example, improving the ventilation of the house and sealing floors and walls.
In many countries, drinking water is obtained from groundwater sources such as springs and wells. Radon dissolved in drinking-water can be released into indoor air. Normally, a higher radon dose is received from inhaling radon compared with ingestion. Straightforward and effective techniques exist to reduce the concentration of radon in drinking-water supplies by aeration or using special filters.
WHO Response
WHO works with international partners to increase understanding of the effects of radon exposure on health and to promote sound policy options for preventing and mitigating radon exposure.
WHO supports the development of national radon programmes and activities related to radon policies, radon mitigation and prevention as well as radon risk communication.
Fact sheets
Radon
Ionizing radiation and health effects
Databases and tools
The Global Health Observatory: Radon
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 68.8 Health and the environment: addressing the health impact of air pollution
WHA 78.5 Promoting and prioritizing an integrated lung health approach
Technical work
Radiation and Health
News
All →
29 July 2024
Departmental update
WHO announces the 2024 updated Compendium of interventions on environmental health
4 February 2021
Departmental update
More countries act against exposure to radon and associated cancer risks
21 September 2009
Departmental update
WHO calls for tighter standards on indoor radon
30 January 2006
Note for Media
Improve home ventilation to reduce radon levels, WHO warns
Latest publications
All →
3 July 2024
Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance in health and environment, 2024 update
This is the 2024 update of the Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment.
The Compendium is a comprehensive collection of available...
Download
Read More
23 January 2024
Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment: version with International Classification...
In this version of the compendium, each guidance is coded using the International Classification of Health Interventions (ICHI).The compendium provides...
Download
Read More
1 April 2022
Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment, 2022 update
This updated version of the compendium provides a systematic compilation of published guidance from WHO and other UN organizations on health and environment....
Download
Read More
3 September 2021
Compendium of WHO and other UN guidance on health and environment
This compendium provides a systematic compilation of published guidance from WHO and other UN organizations on health and environment. Guidance on policies...
Download
Read More
Infographics
All →
Infographic
How housing can improve health and well-being
Infographic
Let's work together for housing conditions that promote health
Infographic
Radiation: Key risks to health
Events
All →
Webinar: Management of radioactivity in drinking water including radon
30 October 2019
Webinar: Radon in groundwater
12 December 2018
Indoor air pollution beyond fuel combustion: intersectoral actions
30 October 2018 13:30 – 14:30 UTC Time
Webinar: Development of educational resources on radon for health care providers
28 June 2018
Related health topics
Physical environment
Air pollution
Non-communicable diseases
Cancer
Physical environment
Environmental health
Physical environment
Radiation
Substances
Tobacco
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)