Buruli ulcer (Mycobacterium ulcerans infection)
Skip to main content
Overview
Buruli ulcer is a chronic debilitating disease that mainly affects the skin and sometimes bones. First described by Sir Albert Cook in 1897 in Uganda, it was not until the 1930s that Australian scientists led by Peter MacCallum first succeeded in culturing the organism from lesions of patients from the Bairnsdale region. The name Buruli comes from an area of Uganda where many cases were reported in the 1960s. In Africa, about half of the patients are children under 15 years. In Australia, the average age is around 60 years. In 1998, WHO established the Global Buruli Ulcer Initiative in response to the growing spread of the disease, particularly in West Africa.
Buruli ulcer is caused by
Mycobacterium
and
belongs to the family of bacteria that causes tuberculosis and leprosy. Although the causative organism of Buruli ulcer is an environmental bacterium, the mode of transmission to humans remains unknown. The organism produces a unique toxin – mycolactone – that causes the damage to the skin. Early diagnosis and treatment are crucial to minimizing morbidity, costs and prevent long-term disability.
Symptoms
Symptoms of Buruli ulcer begin with painless nodules and swelling, usually on the arms and legs and sometimes on other parts of the body. These areas can then develop into large ulcers with a white and yellow base.
M.
ulcerans
produces the toxin mycolactone. This has local immunosuppressive properties that enable the disease to progress rapidly with no pain and fever, making early detection difficult. However, if the ulcers are treated quickly, most will heal completely.
If diagnosed late or left untreated, the condition can lead to scarring, permanent disfigurement and disability.
Buruli ulcer has been reported in 33 countries in Africa, the Americas, Asia and the Western Pacific. Most cases occur in tropical and subtropical regions except in Australia, China and Japan. Out of the 33 countries, 14 regularly report data to WHO. The number of annual cases can be found in
Global Health Observatory
.
Treatment
Treatment consists of a combination of antibiotics and complementary treatments (under morbidity management and disability prevention/rehabilitation).
Antibiotics:
Current WHO recommendations are rifampicin 10 mg/kg per body weight daily and clarithromycin 7.5 mg/kg per body weight twice daily. Treatment guidance for health workers can be found in the WHO publication
Treatment of
mycobacterium
ulcerans
disease (Buruli ulcer)
.
Other interventions
In addition to the antibiotics and depending on the stage of the disease, other interventions such as wound care, lymphoedema management, surgery (mainly debridement and skin grafting to speed up healing) and physiotherapy are needed. Psychological support
may also be needed for those with severe disease.
These same interventions are applicable to other neglected tropical diseases, such as leprosy and lymphatic filariasis, so it is important to integrate a long-term care approach into the health system to benefit all patients. The integrated approach to
the control of skin related NTDs provides an opportunity to integrate Buruli ulcer detection and its management with these diseases.
Fact sheets
Buruli ulcer (Mycobacterium ulcerans infection)
Databases and tools
Global Health Observatory (GHO) data
Resolutions and decisions
Buruli ulcer
2004 | WHA57.1
Initiatives and groups
WHO Technical Advisory Group on Buruli ulcer
Skin NTDs Laboratory Network (Skin NTDs
LABNET
)
Training
Buruli ulcer: training of health workers at national and district levels on skin-NTDs
Technical work
Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases
News
All →
26 May 2025
Departmental update
Progress for NTDs: two resolutions adopted at WHA78
1 April 2025
Departmental update
Global meeting calls for stronger partnerships to tackle skin NTDs
24 March 2025
Departmental update
Second global meeting on skin NTDs focuses on advancing integration and innovation
10 February 2025
Departmental update
WHO and Anesvad Foundation to extend collaboration on skin NTDs in sub-Saharan Africa
WHO Academy Course
Buruli ulcer: training of health workers at national and district levels on skin-NTDs
Events
24 – 26 March 2025
Second global meeting on skin-related neglected tropical diseases (skin NTDs)
Working Groups
WHO Skin NTDs Working Groups (office.com)
Following the Skin NTD Meeting held in Geneva, Switzerland from 27-31 March 2023, WHO is proposing to establish different INFORMAL WORKING GROUPS to help follow up of the main outcomes and keep the momentum.
Call for consultation
3 October 2025
Call for consultation
Survey : WHA resolution on skin diseases as a global public health priority
Our work
Supporting countries endemic for Buruli ulcer
Promoting the integrated approach to skin-related neglected tropical diseases
Promoting research on Buruli ulcer
Engaging partnerships and global coordination for Buruli ulcer
Publications
All →
13 June 2025
Skin health for all: update on skin neglected tropical diseases with a focus on Buruli...
Weekly epidemiological record
Download
Read More
22 January 2025
Harmonizing diagnostic polymerase chain reaction procedures for skin-related neglected tropical diseases:...
The meeting on harmonizing diagnostic polymerase chain reaction (PCR) procedures for skin-related neglected tropical diseases (skin NTDs) took place in...
Download
Read More
23 August 2024
Report of the fifth annual meeting of the network of Buruli ulcer PCR laboratories in the WHO African...
The fifth meeting of the Buruli ulcer laboratory
network (BU-LABNET) for the WHO African
Region was held at the Noguchi Memorial
Institute for Medical...
Download
Read More
10 facts on Buruli ulcer
Multimedia
All →
20 February 2018
Buruli ulcer
Infographic
Countries reporting cases on at least one skin-NTD, 2017-2021
20 October 2020
How do we tackle the skin NTDs to reach the 2030 NTD road map targets?
Infographic
Buruli Ulcer -- Can be cured
27 January 2012
Buruli ulcer - from a difficult past to a hopeful future
Related links
Peer-reviewed publications (PubMed)
Results for Buruli ulcer or
Mycobacterium ulcerans infection
Contact
neglected.diseases@who.int
Dr. Kingsley Bampoe Asiedu
Medical officer
asieduk@who.int
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Dracunculiasis (Guinea-worm disease)
Diseases and conditions
Leishmaniasis
Diseases and conditions
Leprosy (Hansen disease)
Diseases and conditions
Lymphatic filariasis (Elephantiasis)
Diseases and conditions
Mycetoma, chromoblastomycosis and other deep mycoses
Diseases and conditions
Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
Diseases and conditions
Yaws (Endemic treponematoses)