Female genital mutilation
Skip to main content
Overview
Female genital mutilation (FGM) is a traditional harmful practice that involves the partial or total removal of external female genitalia or other injury to female genital organs for non-medical reasons.
It is estimated that more than 230 million girls and women alive today have undergone female genital mutilation in the countries where the practice is concentrated. In addition, every year more than 4 million girls are estimated to be at risk of undergoing female genital mutilation, the majority of whom are cut before they turn 15 years old.
FGM has no health benefits. It can lead to immediate health risks, as well as long-term complications to women’s physical, mental and sexual health and well-being.
The practice is recognized internationally as a violation of human rights of girls and women and as an extreme form of gender discrimination, reflecting deep-rooted inequality between the sexes. As it is practiced on young girls without consent, it is a violation of the rights of children. FGM also violates a person's rights to health, security and physical integrity, the right to be free from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and the right to life when the procedure results in death.
As part of the Sustainable Development Goals, the global community has set a target to abandon the practice of female genital mutilation by the year 2030. While some countries are on track to achieve this target, progress needs to be greatly accelerated in many countries to achieve abandonment goals.
Prevalence
While the exact number of girls and women worldwide who have undergone female genital mutilation remains unknown, at least 230 million girls and women alive today have been subjected to the practice, according to data from the 31 countries where population level data exist. The practice is mainly concentrated in western, eastern, and north-eastern regions of Africa, as well as in some countries in the Middle East and Asia.
With growing migration, there has been an increase in the number of girls and women in Europe, Australia and North America who have either undergone female genital mutilation or who may be at risk of being subjected to the practice. FGM is therefore a global concern.
While there has been an overall decline in the prevalence of FGM over the last three decades in the younger age groups, not all countries have made progress and the pace of decline has been uneven. Current progress is insufficient to keep up with increasing population growth. If trends continue, the number of girls and women undergoing FGM will rise significantly in the next 15 years.
In addition, some health workers themselves are performing FGM, impeding progress in the road to FGM abandonment
WHO response
WHO is strongly opposed to health professionals performing FGM and urges all health workers to uphold the medical code of ethics to “do no harm”. Medicalization of FGM normalizes and condones the practice and hinders long term efforts for abandoning this grave violation of the human rights of women and girls.
WHO recognizes the important role that health care personnel play in supporting and improving the health and well-being of girls and women living with FGM. Moreover, WHO acknowledges the unique position that midwives and nurses may have to influence and change attitudes towards FGM amongst their patients because of their close contact with practicing communities and since they provide the majority of health care in primary health care settings. WHO has developed a training package to help empower health providers by strengthening their knowledge about the practice, so that they in turn can act as influential agents for change within clinical settings as well in their communities and families.
WHO uses a public health approach to FGM and works to ensure that girls and women living with FGM receive quality prevention and care services, by developing evidence-based guidance and resources for training and policy; supporting countries to adapt and implement them; generating evidence on causes, consequences, and costs of FGM and on what works to end the practice; and developing advocacy tools to support efforts to prevent FGM.
Fact sheets
Female genital mutilation
Questions and answers
Questions and answers on FGM Cost Calculator
Resolutions and decisions
Female genital mutilation (WHA61.16)
Technical work
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
Health risks of female genital mutilation
Types of female genital mutilation
News
All →
28 April 2025
News release
WHO issues new recommendations to end the rise in “medicalized” female genital mutilation and support survivors
14 April 2025
Departmental update
New study highlights multiple long-term health complications from female genital mutilation
15 July 2024
Statement
The Gambia’s decision to uphold ban on FGM critical win for girls’ and women’s rights
6 February 2024
Statement
Putting survivors at the forefront of the global movement to end female genital mutilation
Latest publications
All →
28 April 2025
WHO guideline on the prevention of female genital mutilation and clinical management of complications
In 2016, the World Health Organization (WHO) published the WHO guidelines on the management of health complications from female genital mutilation. That...
Download
Read More
3 February 2022
Integrating female genital mutilation content into nursing and midwifery curricula: a practical guide
This guide is intended to promote a global health sector response to FGM for the provision of high-quality prevention and care services to women and girls...
Download
Read More
3 February 2022
Person-centred communication for female genital mutilation prevention: a facilitator’s guide for training...
Evidence shows that FGM can cause several physical, mental and sexual health complications in girls and women, and in newborns. Health-care providers...
Download
Read More
26 January 2022
Ethical considerations in research on female genital mutilation
High-quality, ethical research on female genital mutilation (FGM) is an essential component of international, national and local efforts
to end the...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
22 July 2024
Engaging health workers to help end female genital mutilation
2 February 2023
Survivor, nurse, advocate: Catherine Meng’anyi, from Kenya, shares how she’s working to end female genital mutilation in her lifetime
4 February 2021
In Somalia, health workers, girls and women are experts in preventing female genital mutilation
6 February 2018
Working towards zero tolerance for female genital mutilation in Sudan
Our work
Empowering health care providers to prevent female genital mutilation
Supporting health care providers to manage complications of FGM
Infographics
All →
Infographic
End female genital mutilation
Infographic
Health workers can help end female genital mutilation
Infographic
Here's what governments can do to end female genital mutilation
Infographic
Female genital mutilation can have immediate life-threatening risks
Videos
All →
6 February 2025
International Day of Zero Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation 2025
4 December 2023
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights: Film Festival panel discussion at ECTMIH
6 February 2023
Female Genital Mutilation: Message for International Day of Zero Tolerance
5 February 2023
WHO supporting the health sector to end FGM
Events
All →
New WHO guideline on FGM prevention and response
28 April 2025 15:00 – 16:30 EAT
International Day of Zero Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation 2025
6 February 2025 13:00 – 14:00 UTC Time
Related health topics
Socio-political determinants
Gender and health
Human behaviour
Self-care for health and well-being
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health
Human behaviour
Violence against women