Malaria
Skip to main content
Overview
Malaria is a life-threatening disease caused by parasites that are transmitted to people through the bites of infected female
Anopheles
mosquitoes. It is preventable and curable. There are 5 parasite species that cause malaria in humans, and 2 of these species –
Plasmodium falciparum
and
Plasmodium vivax
– pose the greatest threat.
In 2023, nearly half of the world's population was at risk of malaria. While sub-Saharan Africa carries a disproportionately high share of the global malaria burden, the WHO Regions of South-East Asia and Eastern Mediterranean, Western Pacific, and the Americas also report significant numbers of cases .
There were an estimated 263 million cases of malaria in 2023, and the estimated number of malaria deaths stood at 597 000. In 2023, the African Region was home to 94% and 95% of malaria cases and deaths, respectively.
Children under 5 years of age are most at risk of severe complications from malaria; in 2023, they accounted for nearly 76% of all malaria deaths in the WHO African Region.
Symptoms
Malaria is an acute febrile illness. In a non-immune individual, symptoms usually appear 10–15 days after the infective mosquito bite. The first symptoms – fever, headache and chills – may be mild and difficult to recognize as malaria. If not treated within 24 hours,
Plasmodium falciparum
malaria can progress to severe illness, and lead to death.
Children with severe malaria frequently develop one or more of the following symptoms: severe anaemia, respiratory distress in relation to metabolic acidosis, or cerebral malaria. In adults, multi-organ failure is also frequent. In malaria endemic areas, people may develop partial immunity, allowing asymptomatic infections to occur.
Some people are at considerably higher risk of contracting malaria and developing severe disease than others. These include infants, children under 5 years of age, pregnant women and patients with HIV and AIDS, as well as non-immune migrants, mobile populations and travellers. National malaria control programmes need to take special measures to protect people at higher risk of malaria infection, taking into consideration their specific circumstances.
Treatment
Malaria is a preventable and treatable disease. Early diagnosis and treatment of malaria reduces disease and prevents deaths, and also contributes to reducing transmission. The best available treatment, particularly for
Plasmodium falciparum
malaria, is artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT). Antimalarial medicines can also be used to prevent malaria.
For travellers, malaria can be prevented through chemoprophylaxis, which suppresses the blood stage of malaria infections, thereby preventing malaria disease. Prior to their travel to malaria-endemic countries or regions, individuals should consult their national disease control centres, or other institutions offering travel advice, for information regarding the preventive measures that should be taken.
See also the WHO
International travel and health
WHO recommends protection for all people at risk of malaria with effective malaria vector control.
Fact sheets
Malaria
Questions and answers
Malaria
Malaria vaccines
Artemisinin resistance
Databases and tools
Malaria Threats Map
Countries and territories certified malaria-free by WHO
Global Health Observatory
Initiatives and groups
Malaria Mekong Elimination Programme
Malaria Vaccine Implementation Programme
Resolutions and decisions
WHA70.16 (2017)
WHA68.2 (2015)
WHA64.17 (2011)
WHA60.18 (2007)
WHA58.2 (2005)
Technical work
Global Malaria Programme
Malaria vaccine implementation programme
News
All →
13 August 2025
Departmental update
WHO recommends spatial emanators for malaria vector control and prequalifies first two products
30 July 2025
Departmental update
Paying tribute to David Nabarro
24 July 2025
News release
Timor-Leste certified malaria-free by WHO
14 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO issues first-ever guidance to support countries in staying malaria-free
25 April
World Malaria Day
Malaria Ends with Us:
Reinvest, Reimagine, Reignite
Visit the campaign page →
Latest publications
All →
14 November 2025
Paediatric drug optimization for malaria: meeting report, 24-26 June 2025
This report provides a synthesis of the outcomes of the first paediatric drug optimization exercise that was held for Malaria. The PADO for malaria meeting...
Download
Read More
15 October 2025
Technical consultation to review the ACTwatch Lite survey methodology
ACTwatch Lite is a streamlined private-sector malaria market study designed to generate timely, actionable data on the availability, price and sales volumes...
Download
Read More
13 October 2025
Subnational tailoring of malaria strategies and interventions
This manual provides structured guidance on subnational tailoring (SNT) of malaria interventions and strategies, supporting countries to use local data...
Download
Read More
9 September 2025
Mekong Malaria Elimination Programme epidemiology summary, volume 30, April-June 2025
The Mekong Malaria Elimination (MME) programme is an initiative aimed at supporting Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) countries – Cambodia, Lao People's...
Download
Read More
Our work
Diagnostic testing for malaria
Eliminating malaria
Monitoring malaria drug efficacy and resistance
Promoting malaria chemoprevention
Supporting malaria vector control
Treating malaria
Feature stories
All →
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
24 April 2025
Expanded use of new dual-insecticide nets offers hope for malaria control efforts in Africa
28 February 2025
Donors making a difference: community engagement to promote, provide and protect the health and well-being of all
11 December 2024
Life-saving malaria vaccines reach children in 17 endemic countries in 2024
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Overview of DHIS2 malaria modules implementation
Infographic
Malaria Vaccines (RTS,S/AS01 and R21/Matrix-M) infographic, December 2024
Reaching people at risk of malaria in remote areas of Chhattisgarh, India
Videos
All →
23 July 2025
WHO press conference on global health issues – 23 July 2025
14 May 2025
Sudan: Malaria vaccination in times of conflict
23 April 2025
Message from Dr Daniel Ngamije, Director of the WHO Global Malaria Programme, for the 2025 CS4ME Annual Global Malaria Civil Society Forum
22 April 2025
Message from Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General, for World Malaria Day 2025
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related heath topics
Other
Neglected tropical diseases
Other
Universal health coverage
Health interventions
Vaccines and immunization