Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Skip to main content
Overview
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are spread predominantly by unprotected sexual contact. Some STIs can also be transmitted during pregnancy, childbirth and breastfeeding and through infected blood or blood products.
STIs have a profound impact on health. If untreated, they can lead to serious consequences including neurological and cardiovascular disease, infertility, ectopic pregnancy, stillbirths, and increased risk of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). They are
also associated with stigma, domestic violence, and affects quality of life.
The majority of STIs have no symptoms. When they are present common symptoms of STIs are vaginal or urethral discharge, genital ulcer and lower abdominal pain.
The most common and curable STIs are trichomonas, chlamydia, gonorrhoea and syphilis. Rapidly increasing antimicrobial resistance is a growing threat for untreatable gonorrhoea.
Viral STIs including HIV, genital herpes simplex virus (HSV), viral hepatitis B, human papillomavirus (HPV) and human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) lack or have limited treatment options. Vaccines are available for hepatitis B to prevent
infection that can lead to liver cancer and for HPV to prevent cervical cancer. HIV, HSV and HTLV-1 are lifelong infections: for HIV and HSV there are treatments that can suppress the virus, but currently there are no cures for any of these viral STIs.
Condoms used correctly and consistently are effective methods to protect against STIs and HIV. Screening with early diagnosis of people with STIs and their sexual partners offers the best opportunity for effective treatment and for preventing complications
and further transmission.
Symptoms
A person can have an STI without having obvious symptoms of disease. When present, common symptoms of STIs include: abnormal vaginal discharge, urethral discharge, genital ulcers and lumps, and lower abdominal pain.
Symptoms of specific STIs are:
Gonorrhoea and chlamydial infection
These STIs cause cervicitis in women, urethritis in men and extra-genital infections, including rectal and oropharyngeal manifestations. Common symptoms include vaginal or penile discharge and burning with urination. Infants of infected mothers can
contract neonatal conjunctivitis (red eyes) due to exposure to the STIs during vaginal delivery. Rectal and pharyngeal infections can be asymptomatic.
Syphilis
Syphilis is often asymptomatic, when symptoms occur, primary syphilis presents as a solitary, painless ulcer. Secondary syphilis may manifest as generalized lesions affecting skin, mucous membranes and lymph-node including a classic rash on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. Latent syphilis is asymptomatic and characterized by positive syphilis serology.
Trichomoniasis
The predominant symptoms include abnormal vaginal discharge with redness of the vulva, itching and painful intercourse.
Genital herpes simplex virus (HSV)
HSV most commonly presents as painful sores, vesicles or ulcerations on the external genitalia and mouth. Symptomatic genital HSV is a lifelong condition
that can be characterized by frequent symptomatic recurrences.
Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1)
Generally asymptomatic, the chronic form of HTLV-1 can cause severe disease, including adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma (ATL) and a progressive nervous system condition known as HTLV-1-associated myelopathy or tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP).
Treatment
Effective treatment is currently available for several STIs.
Three bacterial STIs (chlamydia, gonorrhoea and syphilis) and one parasitic STI (trichomoniasis) are usually curable with existing, effective single-dose or multiple-dose regimens of antibiotics.
For viral STIs (HIV, HSV and HTLV-1), the most effective medications available are antivirals or anti-cancer drugs (in the case of HTLV-1), that can modulate the course of the diseases, though they cannot cure these three diseases.
Antimicrobial resistance
(AMR) to antibiotics used to treat STIs, in particular gonorrhoea, has increased rapidly in recent years and has reduced successful treatment outcomes. Results from the current Gonococcal AMR Surveillance Programme (GASP) show trends of high rates of quinolone resistance, increasing azithromycin resistance and emerging resistance of extended-spectrum cephalosporins.
The emergence of decreased susceptibility of gonorrhoea to extended-spectrum cephalosporins, together with established high-levels of resistance to penicillins, sulphonamides, tetracyclines, quinolones and macrolides make gonorrhoea a multidrug-resistant organism. AMR for other STIs, though less common, also exists, making prevention and prompt treatment critical.
To adequately treat STIs it is important to take the appropriate antimicrobials, with the correct dose   and duration for the specific STI to ensure adequate treatment or cure, and to prevent the development of antimicrobial resistance.
Fact sheets
Antimicrobial resistance
Cervical cancer
Hepatitis B
Herpes simplex virus
HIV and AIDS
Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1
Infertility
Multi-drug resistant gonorrhoea
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Syphilis
Questions and answers
Condoms
HIV and AIDS
Mononucleosis (glandular fever)
Mpox
What's super about super gonorrhoea?
Databases and tools
Global health observatory - Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)
Data on syphilis
WHO Gonococcal AMR Surveillance Programme
Policy database
Guidelines
Guidelines on Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)
Resolutions and decisions
Global health sector strategies on, respectively, HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, for the period 2022–2030 (WHA75.20)
WHA A69/59 - Global health sector strategies on HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, for the period 2016–2021
Technical work
Global Sexually Transmitted Infections Programme
Sexual and Reproductive Health and Research including the UN cosponsored Special Research Programme in Human Reproduction (HRP)
News
All →
9 October 2025
Departmental update
WHO announces the development of new recommendations on HTLV-1
10 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO announces the development of guidelines on multiplex testing
26 July 2025
Departmental update
WHO expands guidance on sexually transmitted infections and reviews country progress on policy implementation
23 July 2025
Departmental update
First-ever guidance for Triple Elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B
Latest publications
All →
19 November 2025
Integrated drug resistance action framework for HIV, hepatitis B and C and sexually transmitted infections,...
The
Integrated Drug Resistance Action Framework for HIV, Hepatitis B and C,
and Sexually Transmitted Infections (2026–2030) outlines a unified...
Download
Read More
19 November 2025
Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme (EGASP): gonorrhoea treatment optimization,...
The WHO Enhanced Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme (EGASP)
monitors Neisseria gonorrhoeae antimicrobial resistance to guide
treatment...
Download
Read More
14 July 2025
Overview of WHO recommendations on HIV and sexually transmitted infection testing, prevention, treatment,...
This
document highlights the latest WHO recommendations designed to optimize
health outcomes, streamline delivery and address persistent barriers to
...
Download
Read More
14 July 2025
Country guidance for planning triple elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, syphilis and...
This publication provides guidance for planning country-specific programming to achieve the triple elimination of mother-to-child (or vertical) transmission...
Download
Read More
Feature story
All →
16 May 2025
Safe spaces for LGBTQ+ people: ending discrimination, saving lives
20 December 2024
Lusophone countries united to eliminate HIV, hepatitis, STIs and TB by 2030
29 November 2024
Rosa’s HIV journey - the transformative power of advocacy and community engagement
22 July 2024
Tackling health facility intersectional stigma faced by key populations in Ghana
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Invest in Condoms – The cornerstone of prevention for sexually transmitted infections, including HIV
Infographic
Condoms: A Smart, Safe, and Cost-Effective Choice!
Infographic
Condoms protect
against unplanned pregnancy and most sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, gonorrhoea, chlamydia and syphilis.
Infographic
Condoms prevent most sexually transmitted infections, including HIV
Videos
All →
2 July 2025
Webinar – WHO operational guidance for sustaining HIV, viral hepatitis and STI priority services in a changing funding landscape
10 March 2025
Transforming WHO: Tackling HIV in challenging times with Dr Meg Doherty
9 December 2024
WHO's Science in 5 - Syphilis: Protect yourself and others
9 December 2024
Let’s talk Herpes!
Related health topics
Communicable diseases
Hepatitis
Communicable diseases
HIV
Health and wellbeing
Sexual health