Tobacco
Skip to main content
Overview
Nicotine contained in tobacco is highly addictive and tobacco use is a major risk factor for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, over 20 different types or subtypes of cancer, and many other debilitating health conditions. Every year, more than 7 million people die from tobacco use. Most tobacco-related deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries, which are often targets of intensive tobacco industry interference and marketing.
Tobacco can also be deadly for non-smokers. Second-hand smoke exposure has also been implicated in adverse health outcomes, causing 1.6 million deaths annually.  Smoking while pregnant can lead to several life-long health conditions for babies.
Heated tobacco products (HTPs) contain tobacco and expose users to toxic emissions, many of which cause cancer and are harmful to health. Electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) and electronic non-nicotine delivery systems (ENNDS), commonly known as e-cigarettes,
do not contain tobacco and may or may not contain nicotine, but are harmful to health and undoubtedly unsafe.
Impact
An estimated 1.3 billion people worldwide use tobacco products, 80% of whom are in low- and middle-income countries. Tobacco use contributes to poverty by diverting household spending from basic needs, such as food and shelter, to tobacco. This spending
behaviour is difficult to curb because tobacco is so addictive. It also causes premature death and disability of productive age adults in households thus leading to reduced household income and increased healthcare costs.
In addition to the detrimental impact of tobacco on health, the total economic cost of smoking (from health expenditures and productivity losses together) are estimated to be around US$ 1.4 trillion per year, equivalent in magnitude to 1.8% of the world's
annual gross domestic product (GDP). Almost 40% of this cost occurred in developing countries, highlighting the substantial burden these countries suffer.
Tobacco taxes are applied in part to combat this effect and are seen as the most cost-effective way of curbing tobacco use, particularly among youth and low-income populations. A tax increase that increases tobacco prices by 10% decreases tobacco consumption
by about 4% in high-income countries and about 5% in low- and middle-income countries.
WHO response
The scale of this human and economic tragedy is shocking, but it’s also preventable. Big Tobacco — along with all manufacturers of tobacco products — is fighting to ensure the dangers of their products are concealed, but we are fighting back: In 2003, WHO Member States unanimously adopted the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC), the only public health treaty under the auspices of WHO. In force since 2005, it has currently 181 Parties.
To help countries implement the WHO FCTC, WHO introduced MPOWER, a package of technical measures and resources, each of which corresponds to at least one provision of the WHO FCTC. MPOWER builds the capacity of countries to implement 6 measures to reduce the demand for tobacco products: monitor tobacco use and prevention policies, protect people from tobacco use, offer help to quit tobacco use, warn about the dangers of tobacco, enforce bans on tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship and raise taxes on tobacco.
Fact sheets
Tobacco
Questions and answers
E-cigarettes
Health benefits of smoking cessation
Databases and tools
The Global Health Observatory: Tobacco control
Pictorial health warnings on tobacco products
Initiative and groups
Tobacco cessation consortium
Tobacco-free farms
MPOWER
Study Group on Tobacco Product Regulation (TobReg)
Tobacco Laboratory Network (TobLabNet)
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 56. (‎2003) WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
WHA 42 (‎1989)‎ Tobacco or health. (World No Tobacco Day resolution)
Technical work
Tobacco control
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
Convention Secretariat WHO FCTC
News
All →
17 October 2025
Departmental update
World No Tobacco Day 2026: Unmasking the appeal – countering nicotine and tobacco addiction
6 October 2025
News release
WHO tobacco trends report: 1 in 5 adults still addicted to tobacco
9 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO warns that tobacco use is linked to child stunting
30 May 2025
News release
WHO calls for urgent action to ban flavoured tobacco and nicotine products
Latest publications
All 	→
14 November 2025
WHO study group on tobacco product regulation: report on the scientific basis of tobacco product regulation:...
This report of the WHO Study Group on Tobacco Product Regulation provides the Director-General with evidence-based recommendations for Member States about...
Download
Read More
6 October 2025
WHO global report on trends in prevalence of tobacco use 2000–2024 and projections 2025–2030
This report presents WHO estimates of tobacco use prevalence among the population aged 15 years and older from 2000–2024, with trends projected to...
Download
Read More
2 September 2025
Tobacco and stunting
This document is the eleventh in a series of Tobacco Knowledge Summaries and is prepared with the objective to summarize the current evidence on the association...
Download
Read More
29 June 2025
Standard operating procedure for the determination of flavouring agents in e-liquids using non-targeted...
WHO TobLabNet SOP16 is a new analytical method and standard operating procedure for the determination of flavouring agents in e-liquids using non-targeted...
Download
Read More
Documents
All 	→
12 November 2025
WHO position on Tobacco Control and Harm Reduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) is warning that tobacco and nicotine companies are misappropriating the public health concept of harm reduction while...
Download
Read More
30 May 2025
Information sheet: Manipulation and marketing strategies used by tobacco and nicotine industries to promote...
Tobacco, nicotine and related      products are often manipulated to attract and retain users, including      through deception, for commercial gain, at...
Download
Read More
30 May 2025
Information Sheet: The role of flavours in increasing the appeal of tobacco, nicotine and related products
Flavours in tobacco, nicotine and related products enhance      attractiveness and appeal, especially to young people, contributing to      experimentation,...
Download
Read More
30 May 2025
Information sheet: Flavour accessories in tobacco products enhance attractiveness and appeal
Flavours in tobacco, nicotine and related products enhance attractiveness and      appeal, contributing to experimentation, initiation and sustained tobacco...
Download
Read More
Our work
All 	→
Enforcing tobacco advertising, promotion & sponsorship bans
Monitoring tobacco use
Protecting people from tobacco smoke
Quitting tobacco
Feature stories
All 	→
1 June 2025
Donors making a difference: tobacco control
1 June 2024
Eight public health champions celebrated at the Seventy-seventh World Health Assembly
7 December 2023
Sarah's journey: empowering women through high iron beans
13 June 2023
Donors making a difference: healthier communities across Africa
Infographics
All 	→
Infographic
Second-hand smoke is dangerous for all of us, especially babies and children
Infographic
Smoke-free environments save children's lives
Infographic
A 'smoke-free generation' is in our reach
Videos
All 	→
27 May 2025
Tobacco and nicotine products: World No Tobacco Day theme is Bright products. Dark intentions
19 May 2025
World No Tobacco Day webinar by WHO: Unmask the appeal of tobacco and nicotine products
15 May 2024
World No Tobacco Day 2024: Youth step in and speak out #TobaccoExposed
16 November 2023
Tobacco industry lies
Podcasts
Episode #139 – The tobacco trap
The tobacco industry continues to sell death and destruction by using flavors, packaging and advertising. Is there any “safe” product or consumption method? How does tobacco use harm your body? Join us today in conversation with Simone St. Claire on Science in 5.
Episode #104 - Smoke-free indoor spaces
Indoor smoke-free spaces are becoming more commonplace, and for good reason. Did you know that over a million people die every year due to second-hand smoke? One in three countries now have policies in place to create 100% smoke-free spaces, according to a recent WHO report. How do indoor smoke-free spaces help our health and our economies? Dr Kerstin Schotte explains in Science in 5
Episode #52 - Tobacco & COVID-19
Are you planning to quit tobacco during the pandemic? What risk does COVID-19 pose to a tobacco user? Learn how the tobacco industry lured people to consume tobacco during the pandemic. Dr Hebe Gouda explains the health benefits of quitting tobacco in Science in 5.
Campaigns
STOP THE LIES  #TOBACCOEXPOSED
World No Tobacco Day 2025
Events
All →
2025
World No Tobacco Day 2025 - Unmasking the appeal
31 May 2025 CET
2025
World No Tobacco Day event: Exposing lies, protecting lives: Unmask the appeal of tobacco and nicotine products
13 May 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
The twelfth meeting of the WHO Study Group on Tobacco Product Regulation
10 – 13 December 2024
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Cardiovascular diseases
Behavioural interventions
Health promotion
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Health and wellbeing
Oral health