Healthy diet
Skip to main content
Overview
A healthy diet is a foundation for health, well-being, optimal growth and development.
It protects against all forms of malnutrition. Unhealthy diet is one of the
leading risks for the global burden of disease, mainly for noncommunicable
diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and cancer.
Evidence shows the health benefits of a diet high in whole grains, vegetables,
fruit, legumes and nuts, and low in salt, free sugars and fats, particularly
saturated and trans fats. A healthy diet starts early in life with adequate breastfeeding.
The benefits of a healthy diet are reflected in higher educational outcomes,
productivity and lifelong health.
A healthy diet is also more environmentally sustainable, as it is associated
to lower greenhouse gas emissions, lower use freshwater and land mass.
However, healthy diets can be inaccessible, particularly in low- and
middle-income countries, and also in places and situations with high rates of
food insecurity. Around the world, an estimated 3 billion people cannot access safe,
nutritious and sufficient food. In addition, the proliferation of highly
processed food, supported by aggressive marketing, rapid unplanned urbanization
and changing lifestyles have contributed to more people eating unhealthy diets
high in energy, free sugars, salt, saturated fats and trans fats.
Recommendations
What constitutes a healthy diet may differ depending on individual needs, locally available foods, dietary customs, cultural norms and other considerations. However, the basic principles of healthy diets remain the same for everyone. The nature of access to food requires broader solutions at the societal level to promote safe and healthy food options.
WHO recommends
to meet the needs of energy, protein, vitamins and minerals through a varied diet, largely plant based, and balancing energy intake with expenditure;
obtaining the largest amount of energy from carbohydrates, mainly through legumes and wholegrain cereals;
reducing total fats to less than 30% of total energy intake, shifting fat intake away from saturated and trans fat to unsaturated fats, and eliminating industrial trans fats from the diet;
reducing free sugars to less than 10% (ideally 5%) of total energy intake;
limiting sodium intake to less than 2 grams per day (equivalent to 5 grams of salt); and
consuming at least 400 grams of vegetables and fruit per day in adults and children above 10, and 250–350 grams per day in younger children.
WHO response
WHO continuously updates the
guidance
on what constitutes a healthy diet to prevent all forms of malnutrition and promote well-being in different population groups across the life course and on how different nutrients and foods contribute to it.
WHO develops evidence-informed guidance on improving the food environment, such as school food and nutrition policies, public food procurement policies, nutrition labelling policies, policies to restricting marketing foods and beverages to children, and fiscal policies (i.e., taxation and subsidies). WHO engages with food manufacturers on improving the nutrition profile of their products.
WHO supports Member States in adopting and implementing policies by providing tools such as systems to characterize the nutrient profiles of foods, benchmarks for sodium content in food, manuals on how to implement fiscal policies and marketing restriction policies.
WHO regularly monitors the adoption and implementation of food environment policies and their impact on population dietary intake and health.
Fact sheets
Food safety
Healthy diet
Malnutrition
Obesity and overweight
Trans fat
Questions and answers
What is the recommended food for children in their very early years?
Up to what age can a baby stay well nourished by just being breastfed?
5 keys to a healthy diet
Databases and tools
e-Library of evidence for Nutrition Actions (eLENA)
Global database on the Implementation of Food and Nutrition Action (GIFNA)
Nutrition landscape information system (NLiS)
Initiatives and groups
Guideline Development Group for Ultra-Processed Foods
Guideline Development Group on consumption of tropical oils
Guideline Development Group on optimal intake of animal-source foods
Healthy Diets Monitoring Initiative (HDMI)
REPLACE trans fat-free by 2023
WHO Trans Fat Elimination Technical Advisory Group (TFATAG)
Resolutions and decisions
WHA63.14 Marketing of food and non-alcoholic beverages to children
WHA57.17 Global strategy on diet, physical activity and health
Technical work
Nutrition and Food Safety
Noncommunicable Diseases
Health Promotion
News
All →
26 September 2025
Departmental update
Countries and global leaders recognized for their action to tackle the obesity crisis
27 May 2025
Departmental update
World Health Assembly re-commits to global nutrition targets and marketing regulations
3 April 2025
Departmental update
WHO unveils bold commitments at Nutrition for Growth Summit
26 March 2025
Departmental update
United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025) extended to 2030
Our work
REPLACE trans fat-free by 2023
Preventing noncommunicable diseases
Fact in pictures
9 June 2021
Obesity
22 February 2018
Nutrition
Events
All →
Launch of WHO guideline on fortification of edible oils and fats with vitamins A and D for public health
17 November 2025 13:00 – 14:00 CET
Country Voices on Trans Fat Elimination: Policies in Action
16 October 2025 10:00 – 11:00 CET
Launch of the WHO guideline on the use of lower-sodium salt substitutes
27 January 2025 14:00 – 15:15 CET
Publications
All 	→
24 October 2025
WHO guideline on fortification of edible oils and fats with vitamins A and D for public health
Vitamin A deficiency remains a leading cause of preventable blindness in children and also increases the risks of severe illness or death from infections....
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: topical briefs on maternal, infant and young child nutrition
Recognizing that the world is not on track to meet all of the 2025 global nutrition targets, WHO Member States, during the 78th World Health Assembly in...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: child wasting brief
Wasting, or being too thin for one’s age, is defined as a weight-for-height that is more than two standard deviations below the World Health Organization...
Download
Read More
22 October 2025
Global nutrition targets 2030: childhood overweight brief
Children aged 0 to 5 years are classified as overweight if their weight-for-length/height or BMI-for-age falls over 2 standard deviations above the median...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
21 October 2025
Spreadsheets for WHO reference protocol for measuring fatty acids in foods, with emphasis on monitoring...
This document was prepared in support of the publication "WHO reference protocol for measuring fatty acids in foods, with emphasis on monitoring trans-fatty...
Download
Read More
18 September 2025
Nutrition and Food Safety News - July-August 2025
This edition of the NFS Newsletter features key activities we undertook in July and August 2025.
Download
Read More
26 August 2025
Nutrition and Food Safety News - May-June 2025
This edition of the NFS Newsletter features key activities we undertook in May and June 2025.
Download
Read More
28 July 2025
The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2025
This report is the annual global monitoring report for Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 2 targets 2.1 and 2.2 – to end hunger, food insecurity...
Read More
Infographies
All →
Infographic
Nutrition ferritin - iron from your food
Infographic
Essential nutrition action (ENA) - Life-course
Infographic
Essential nutrition action (ENA) - Older people
Infographic
Essential nutrition actions (ENA) - Pregnant women
Videos
All →
6 May 2024
Global sodium benchmarks for reducing sodium content in food products - WHO Webinar
4 March 2024
WHO's department of nutrition and food safety: key achievements 2023
10 October 2023
Healthier food and healthier food environments at sports events
3 October 2023
Healthier foods and food environments at sports events - WHO's webinar of 3 October 2023
Podcasts
Episode #101 - Do sweeteners help with weight loss?
Do non-sugar sweeteners help with weight loss? Do they pose a risk to your health? What about so called “natural” sweetness like Stevia? Jason Montez explains the findings from the new WHO report in Science in 5.
Episode #91 - Everything you need to know about trans fat
WHO is urging action by Governments and the food industry to remove industrial trans fat from our food chain. Which foods contain trans fat? How do they harm us? WHO’s Dr Francesco Branca explains in Science in 5.
Related health topics
Diseases and conditions
Diabetes
Human behaviour
Nutrition
Physical environment
Food safety
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Human behaviour
Physical activity