Earthquakes
Skip to main content
Overview
Earthquakes can strike suddenly and without warning. An earthquake is a violent and abrupt shaking of the ground, caused by movement between tectonic plates along a fault line in the earth’s crust. Earthquakes can result in the ground shaking, soil liquefaction, landslides, fissures, avalanches, fires and tsunamis. The extent of destruction and harm caused by an earthquake depends on:
magnitude
intensity and duration
the local geology
the time of day that it occurs
building and industrial plant design and materials
the risk-management measures put in place.
Between 1998-2017, earthquakes caused nearly 750 000 deaths globally, more than half of all deaths related to natural disasters. More than 125 million people were affected by earthquakes during this time period, meaning they were injured, made homeless, displaced or evacuated during the emergency phase of the disaster.
Impact
Health threats due to earthquakes can vary according the magnitude of the earthquake, the nature of the built environment (such as poor housing or urban slums), and the secondary effects of the earthquake, like tsunamis or landslides. Earthquakes can have immediate and long-term impacts on health.
Immediate health impacts include:
trauma-related deaths and injuries from building collapse;
trauma-related deaths and injuries from the secondary effects of the earthquake, like drowning from tsunamis or burns from fires.
Medium-term health impacts include:
secondary infection of untreated wounds;
increased morbidity and risk of complications related to pregnancy and childbirth due to interrupted obstetric and neonatal services;
potential risk of communicable diseases, particularly in areas affected by overcrowding;
increased morbidity and risk of complications of chronic diseases due to interruption of treatment;
increased psychosocial needs;
potential environmental contamination by chemical/radiological agents following destruction of industrial infrastructure.
Earthquakes can also damage health facilities and transportation, which can disrupt service delivery and access to care. Health workers may not be able to reach health facilities that are still functional and medical supplies may be lost.
WHO Response
As the health cluster lead for global emergencies, WHO works with partners to mitigate, prepare and respond to earthquakes worldwide. This includes:
strengthening health emergency risk management systems
limiting the risk of exposure to earthquakes by improving the quality of the built environment, with better land-use control, including regulating building
ensuring that health facilities are resilient to hazards, and that they are able to remain functional and able to respond to increased and changed health needs after earthquakes, with staff trained appropriately
mobilizing medical response teams, including establishing temporary health structures and field hospitals, as well as emergency medical kits
investing in community preparedness, as local resident are often      the first responders.
Fact sheets
Mental health in emergencies
Questions and answers
WHO's role in Humanitarian Health Action
What is WHO's role in emergencies?
Databases and tools
Disaster statistics - UNDRR
Disease outbreak news
Latest DONs
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 64.10 Strengthening national health emergency and disaster management capacities and resilience of health systems
Training
E-Learning: Incident Management System (Tier 1)
Technical work
Health Emergencies Programme
News
All →
1 March 2023
News release
Visit of WHO Director-General to north-west Syria
10 February 2023
News release
WHO sends health supplies to reach 400 000 people impacted by the earthquakes in Türkiye and the Syrian Arab Republic
14 August 2021
News release
PAHO deploys experts to support Haiti during earthquake aftermath
13 May 2015
News release
Emergency preparedness pays off as Kathmandu hospitals respond to earthquakes
Publications
All →
29 April 2020
Preparedness for cyclones, tropical storms, tornadoes, floods and earthquakes during the COVID-19 pandemic
The
WHO health advisory provides guidance to countries on adapting all existing
preparedness and response plans and procedures for natural hazards such...
Download
Read More
10 January 2018
Communicating risk in public health emergencies: a WHO guideline for emergency risk communication (‎ERC)‎...
Recent public health emergencies, such as the Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa (2014–2015), the emergence of the Zika virus syndrome in...
Download
Read More
1 January 2018
Chemical releases associated with earthquakes
This leaflet provides brief information about Natech and other
chemical releases caused directly or indirectly by earthquakes.
It is an extract from...
Download
Read More
1 January 2015
Ten years after the tsunami of 2004: Impact action change future
On 26 December 2004, two extremely rare events occurred close to the southwestern shores of northern Indonesia. The first was a massive earthquake measuring...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
30 March 2025
WHO flash appeal: earthquake response in Myanmar
WHO flash appeal: earthquake response in Myanmar
Videos
All →
12 February 2023
WHO press conference in Damascus, Syria - 12 February 2023
21 October 2016
WHO: Emergencies surveillance - Early Warning Alert and Response System
11 June 2015
WHO district support office in Gorkha to support the government of Nepal after 2015 earthquakes
20 May 2015
WHO: The response to the 2015 Nepal earthquakes: the value of preparedness
Related health topics
Disasters
Floods
Disasters
Landslides
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Disasters
Tsunamis
Physical environment
Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)