Volcanic eruptions
Skip to main content
Overview
A volcano is a vent in the Earth’s crust from which eruptions occur. There are about 1500 potentially active volcanoes worldwide. When volcanoes erupt they can spew hot, dangerous gases, ash, lava and rock that can cause disastrous loss of life and property, especially in heavily populated areas. Volcanic activities and wildfires affected 6.2 million people and caused nearly 2400 deaths between 1998-2017.
There are different types of volcanic eruptive events, including:
pyroclastic explosions, with is fast-moving hot gas and volcanic matter
hot ash releases
lava flows
gas emissions
glowing avalanches, when gas and ashes release.
Volcanic eruptions can also cause secondary events, such as floods, landslides and mudslides, if there are accompanying rain, snow or melting ice. Hot ashes can also start wildfires.
Volcanic eruptions can impact climate change through emitting volcanic gases like sulfur dioxide, which causes global cooling, and volcanic carbon dioxide, which has the potential to promote global warming.
Impact
Volcanic eruptions can pose multiple health threats depending on the proximity of the volcano to the community and whether there was any warning.
Volcanic eruptions can cause:
suffocation
infectious diseases, such as conjunctivitis
acute and chronic respiratory diseases from falling ash and breathing gases and fumes
burns and traumatic injuries, such as lacerations from falling rock
eye and skin irritations from acid rain.
Ash and chemicals from the eruption can also generate risk of food and water contamination, and compromise basic services, like water, transportation, communications and health services. Likewise, the accumulation of ash on roofs can cause damage or collapse of buildings, both immediately and after the event.
WHO Response
WHO works with Member States to build resilient and proactive health systems that can anticipate the needs and challenges during emergencies so that they are more likely to reduce risks and respond effectively when needed.
The magnitude of the physical and human costs from volcanoes can be reduced if adequate emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery measures are implemented in a sustainable and timely manner. This includes, ensuring early warning systems are in place, evaluating the population, and raises awareness about the risks of volcanic activities.
As the health cluster lead for global emergencies, WHO works with partners to respond to:
ensure appropriate food supplementation;
restore primary care services, like immunization, child and maternal health, and mental health;
assemble mobile health teams and outreach;
conduct epidemic surveillance, early warning and response;
call for emergency funding to support health action.
Fact sheets
Dioxins
Climate change
Mental health in emergencies
Mercury
Questions and answers
WHO's role in Humanitarian Health Action
What is WHO's role in emergencies?
Databases and tools
Disaster statistics - UNDRR
Disease outbreak news
Latest DONs
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 64.10 Strengthening national health emergency and disaster management capacities and resilience of health systems
Training
Incident Management System (Tier 1)
WHO Incident Management System (Tier 2)
Risk Communication Essentials
Technical work
Health Emergencies Programme
Climate Change
News
All →
29 July 2024
Departmental update
WHO announces the 2024 updated Compendium of interventions on environmental health
2 November 2023
Departmental update
Climate change and noncommunicable diseases: connections
1 March 2023
News release
Visit of WHO Director-General to north-west Syria
10 February 2023
News release
WHO sends health supplies to reach 400 000 people impacted by the earthquakes in Türkiye and the Syrian Arab Republic
Publications
All →
30 January 2024
Fires: four tips to reduce food safety risks
Fires, explosions and volcanic eruptions can damage and contaminate food and water due to heat, smoke, fumes and chemicals. These flyers include tips to...
Download
Read More
22 August 2018
Chemical releases caused by natural hazard events and disasters
The document gives an overview of the role and activities of the health sector at all stages of the risk-management cycle. Hazard-specific annexes provide...
Download
Read More
23 May 2018
Occupational safety and health in public health emergencies: a manual for protecting health workers and...
This manual provides an overview of the main OSH risks faced by emergency responders
during disease outbreaks and other emergencies, such as natural disasters,...
Download
Read More
10 January 2018
Communicating risk in public health emergencies: a WHO guideline for emergency risk communication (‎ERC)‎...
Recent public health emergencies, such as the Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa (2014–2015), the emergence of the Zika virus syndrome in...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Ensuring a coordinated and effective mental health response in emergencies
Making health facilities safe in emergencies and disasters
Rapidly detecting and responding to health emergencies
Managing environmental health risks in emergencies
Related links
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 - 2030
WHO Health Cluster
PAHO: Preparedness guide for volcanic eruptions
Related health topics
Disasters
Climate change
Disasters
Earthquakes
Disasters
Floods
Disasters
Wildfires