Epilepsy
Skip to main content
Overview
Epilepsy is the most
common chronic brain disease and affects people of all ages. More than 50
million people worldwide have epilepsy; nearly 80% of them live in low- and
middle-income countries.
An estimated 70% of people
with epilepsy could be seizure free if properly diagnosed and treated. However,
about three quarters of people with epilepsy in low-income countries do not get
the treatment they need, and this rises to 90% in some countries. In many such
countries, many health professionals do not have the training to recognize,
diagnose and treat epilepsy. In most resource-poor countries, antiseizure medicines
are not available.
People with epilepsy and
their families frequently suffer from stigma and discrimination. In many parts
of the world the true nature of epilepsy has also long been distorted by myths,
fear and mistaken notions about the disorder.
WHO is working with
ministries of health and partners to improve access to treatment for epilepsy.
Symptoms and treatment
Epilepsy is not contagious and is characterized by seizures, which occur because of temporary excessive electric activity in the brain. During seizures, people may lose consciousness or awareness, control of bowel or bladder function, they may not be able to hear or see properly, and their movements may become disturbed. The loss of movement control and sensation can cause injuries from falls.
A diagnosis of epilepsy is made by a health professional if there is medical history of at least two seizures. Often this is further confirmed by electroencephalography (EEG), a painless technological method to record and study the electrical activity of the brain.
Treatment for epilepsy can be very effective. With antiseizure medicines, up to 70% of people living with epilepsy could become seizure free. After 2 years of taking medicines without any seizures, a health professional may advise stopping the medicines. Where medicines are not helpful in relieving the condition, some types of surgery can be beneficial. Since people with epilepsy have higher occurrence of psychological conditions such as anxiety and depression, psychosocial help is also useful.
WHO response
Previous WHO collaborative
programmes on epilepsy have shown that integrating epilepsy care in primary
health care can significantly reduce the epilepsy treatment gap. Based on the
evidence-based methods of the WHO Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP),
WHO supports the training of primary care, non-specialist health care providers
to diagnose, treat and follow up people with epilepsy. The WHO Programme on
Reducing the Epilepsy Treatment Gap combined several innovative strategies to
support access and care to services for people with epilepsy, thereby reducing
the epilepsy treatment gap. The Programme was implemented in four countries –
Ghana, Mozambique, Myanmar and Viet Nam.
WHO published
Improving the
lives of people with epilepsy: a technical brief
, which sets out the actions required to deliver an integrated
approach to epilepsy care and treatment. This better meets the multifaceted
needs of people with epilepsy.
Fact sheets
Epilepsy
Mental disorders
Databases and tools
ATLAS Country Resources for Neurological Disorders Second Edition
Resolutions and decisions
Resolution WHA 68.20: Global burden of epilepsy and the need for coordinated action at the country level to address its health, social and public knowledge implications
A75/10 Add.4: Draft intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022–2031
Technical work
Department of Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use
News
All →
14 October 2025
News release
11 million lives lost each year: urgent action needed on neurological care
20 July 2023
Departmental update
New global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders published
12 December 2022
Departmental update
New WHO brief sets out actions needed to improve lives of people with epilepsy
9 August 2022
Departmental update
Launch of first WHO position paper on optimizing brain health across life
Latest publications
All →
20 November 2025
Paediatric drug optimization for epilepsy: meeting report, 1-2 July 2025
The PADO for epilepsy exercise aimed to support the identification of short- and long term priorities for epilepsy medicines for the paediatric age group,...
Download
Read More
4 November 2025
Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders
In May 2022, Member States adopted the Intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022-2031, which aims to improve access...
Download
Read More
12 December 2022
Improving the lives of people with epilepsy
Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders globally. The WHO epilepsy technical brief aims to strengthen action for epilepsy and complements...
Download
Read More
9 August 2022
Optimizing brain health across the life course: WHO position paper
Brain health is a rapidly expanding field. WHO’s position paper on optimizing brain health across the life course is a technical complement to the...
Download
Read More
Feature stories
All →
8 February 2019
Scaling up epilepsy care in Myanmar
8 February 2019
Pilot studies help close the epilepsy treatment gap
8 February 2019
The Fight against epilepsy in Ghana
1 January 2016
Defeating epilepsy
Events
13 February 2023
International Epilepsy Day
Related health topics
Health and wellbeing
Brain health
Health and wellbeing
Mental health