Health workforce
Skip to main content
Overview
Health systems can only function with health workers; improving health service coverage and realizing the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health is dependent on their availability, accessibility, acceptability and quality.
WHO estimates a projected shortfall of 11 million health workers by 2030, mostly in low- and lower-middle income countries.
However, countries at all levels of socioeconomic development face, to varying degrees, difficulties in the education, employment, deployment, retention, and performance of their workforce.
The chronic under-investment in education and
training of health workers in some countries and the mismatch between education and employment strategies in relation to health systems and population needs are contributing to continuous shortages. These are compounded by difficulties in deploying
health workers to rural, remote and underserved areas. Moreover, the increasing international migration of health workers may exacerbate health workforce shortfalls, particularly in low- and lower-middle income countries. Human resources for health
information systems are often weak to take stock of selected health workers from the public sector.
In some countries, challenges in universal access to health workers may also result from the lack of capacity by the public sector to absorb the supply of health workers due to budgetary constraints. As a result, some countries face the paradox of health
worker unemployment co-existing with major unmet health needs.
The High-Level Commission on Health Employment and Economic Growth identified six pathways by which investments in the health and social workforce can spur inclusive economic growth. The health workforce has a vital role in building the resilience
of communities and health systems to respond to disasters caused by natural or artificial hazards, as well as related environmental, technological and biological hazards and risks. Sixty-seven per cent (67%) of the health and social workforce are women and investing in the
health workforce is an opportunity to create decent employment opportunities, in particular for women and youth.
Impact at country level
The Global Strategy on Human Resources for Health: Workforce 2030 is the key guiding document with principles and objectives presented below:
Guiding principles
Promote the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health.
Provide integrated, people-centred health services devoid of stigma and discrimination.
Foster empowered and engaged communities.
Uphold the personal, employment and professional rights of all health workers, including safe and decent working environments and freedom from all kinds of discrimination, coercion and violence.
Eliminate gender-based violence, discrimination and harassment.
Promote international collaboration and solidarity in alignment with national priorities.
Ensure ethical recruitment practices in conformity with the provisions of the WHO Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel.
Mobilize and sustain political and financial commitment and foster inclusiveness and collaboration across sectors and constituencies.
Promote innovation and the use of evidence.
Partnerships
Working for Health Programme
The Working for Health Programme is a joint partnership between the World Health Organization (WHO), International Labour Organization (ILO) and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to expand and transform the health and social workforce to drive inclusive economic growth and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Working for Health contributes to universal health coverage and to SDG 3, 4, 5 and 8 (health, education, gender equality, decent work and economic growth) through the
Five-Year Action Plan on Health Employment and Inclusive Economic Growth 2017-2021
.  In 2020, Working for Health supported thirty-two countries and two regional economic areas namely, the Southern African Development Community and the West African Economic and Monetary Union. The Working for Health Programme supports strengthening health workforce data globally through the
International Platform on Health Worker Mobility
Platform on Health Worker Mobility and Inter-Agency Data Exchange (IADEx).
The Global Health Workforce Network
The WHO led/coordinated network
Global Health Workforce Network
was established in 2016, following a request by Member States and building on a proposal by the Board of the Global Health Workforce Alliance. The Network operates within WHO as a global mechanism for stakeholder consultation, dialogue and coordination on comprehensive and coherent health workforce policies in support of the implementation of the Global Strategy on Human Resources for Health and the recommendations of the Commission.
Key national and local partners
ministries of health, education, labour, finance, national planning, gender, youth
professional associations and trade unions
regulatory authorities
private providers
civil society.
Key international partners
International Labour Organization (ILO), The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), The World Bank, The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), The European Union
(EU), International NGOs.
Questions and answers
National reporting instrument
WHO health workforce support and safeguards list
Database and tools
Global health workforce statistics
Global Health Observatory
WHO national health workforce accounts data portal
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 75.17 Human resources for health
WHA74.14 - Protecting, safeguarding and investing in the health and care workforce (2021)
WHA74.15  -  Strengthening nursing and midwifery: investments in education, jobs, leadership and service delivery (2021)
WHA73/9 -  WHO Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel (2020)
WHA73 (30) - Human resources for health (2020)
WHA72.3 - Community health workers delivering primary health care: opportunities and challenges (2019)
WHA72(19) - 2020: International Year of the Nurse and the Midwife (2019)
EB140(3) - Human resources for health and implementation of the outcomes of the United Nations’ High-Level Commission on Health Employment and Economic Growth (2017)
WHA70.6 - Human resources for health and implementation of the outcomes of the United Nations’ High-Level Commission on Health Employment and Economic Growth
WHA 69.19 - Global strategy on human resources for health: workforce 2030
Training
COVID-19 vaccination training for health workers
Technical work
Health Workforce
News
All →
12 May 2025
News release
Nursing workforce grows, but inequities threaten global health goals
8 December 2024
Departmental update
New study measuring laws protecting health and care workers highlights innovations and gaps
28 October 2024
Departmental update
International Day of Care and Support: time for gender-equitable investment to better value and recognize care workers
23 October 2024
Departmental update
Eastern Mediterranean Public Health Network (EMPHNET) hosts partners for national public health workforce capacity
Latest publications
All →
7 October 2025
WHO Academy quality standards: leading lifelong learning for a healthier world
The WHO Academy serves as a transformative force in global health education, dedicated to empowering health professionals, policymakers, and public health...
Download
Read More
7 July 2025
WHO Academy: annual report 2024
The WHO Academy: annual report 2024 highlights a landmark year marked by the official opening of the Academy’s state-of-the-art campus in Lyon, France,...
Download
Read More
24 June 2025
Guidance on planning, implementing and scaling up task sharing for contraceptive services
This guide  provides evidence-based recommendations and practical strategies for planning, implementing, and scaling up task sharing in contraceptive services....
Download
Read More
17 June 2025
Global health emergency corps framework
The Global Health Emergency Corps (GHEC) was launched in May 2023 by WHO with Member States and partners as part of the efforts to strengthen the global...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
16 July 2025
HRP Alliance in action: Changing social norms through values clarification in Africa
The HRP Alliance supports research capacity strengthening by bringing together institutions conducting research in sexual and reproductive health and rights...
Download
Read More
7 July 2025
Independent Stakeholders Reporting Instrument 2024: Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment...
This document is a combined summary of international stakeholder responses for the fifth round of reporting on the Global Code of Practice on the International...
Download
Read More
10 April 2025
The impact of suspensions and reductions in health official development assistance on health systems
To better understand and respond to the urgent challenges that countries are facing in terms of the impact on health systems caused by recent suspensions...
Download
Read More
30 January 2025
Risk assessment tool for identifying and managing health and care workers with a potential occupational...
This risk assessment tool is used to evaluate health and care workers in healthcare settings who have had occupational exposure to a person with mpox....
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Addressing critical knowledge gaps in newborn health
Addressing the international migration of health workers
Building a skilled workforce to prepare for and respond to emergencies
Encouraging medical education to bolster the global health care workforce
Feature stories
All →
22 September 2025
Transforming abortion care starts with education
7 August 2025
Prioritizing respectful care for pregnant women, mothers and babies
4 April 2025
Fatima: crossing deserts to protect mothers and newborns in Pakistan
28 March 2025
Donors making a difference to maternal health & newborn health: the urgent drive to save women’s lives across the world
Infographics
All →
20 December 2026
Rehabilitation: addressing musculoskeletal conditions, an opportunity for health systems – webinar 4
Infographic
There is no excuse for violence. Be an ally. Speak up.
19 November 2025
Every sex act requires consent. Always.
Infographic
There is no excuse for violence. Support survivors to access services
Videos
All →
15 October 2025
Lifelong learning that saves lives: inside the WHO Academy’s simulation-based training
5 June 2025
Improving quality of care to save lives in Sierra Leone
12 May 2025
State of the world's nursing report 2025: official global launch
11 May 2025
International Nurses Day 2025: Global Scrub Choir greeting
Events
All →
The WHO Academy is opening its doors for a screening and talk around noma, a neglected disease
27 November 2025 18:30 – 20:30 CET
Preventing and managing maternal sepsis
24 November 2025 12:00 – 13:00 CET
Fourth Meeting of the Expert Advisory Group on the WHO Global Code
12 – 13 November 2025
Empowering the global health workforce through innovative lifelong learning models
12 October 2025 16:00 – 17:30 CET
Related health topics
Health systems
Health Laws
Health systems
Health systems governance
Health systems
Hospitals
Health interventions
Medical devices