Physical activity
Skip to main content
Overview
Regular physical activity is proven to help prevent and manage noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) such as heart disease, hypertension, stroke, diabetes and several cancers. It also helps to maintain a healthy body weight and can improve mental health, quality of life and well-being. Physical activity refers to all movement. Popular ways to be active include walking, cycling, wheeling, sports, active recreation and play, and can be done at any level of skill and for enjoyment by everybody. Work such as household chores or jobs requiring physical labour is another way to be physically active.
Yet, current global estimates show 1 in 3 adults and 81% of adolescents do not do enough physical activity. Furthermore, as countries develop economically, levels of inactivity increase and can be as high as 70% due to changing transport patterns, increased use of technology for work and recreation, cultural values and increasing sedentary behaviour.
Sedentary behaviour is periods of low energy expenditure such as sitting and watching TV. Both sedentary behaviour and inadequate levels of physical activity have negative impacts on health systems, the environment, economic development, community and individual well-being and quality of life.
Impact
Physical inactivity is one of the leading risk factors for noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) and death worldwide.  Alternately, regular physical activity reduces risk of many types of cancer by 8–28%; heart disease and stroke by 19%; diabetes by 17%, depression and dementia by 28–32%.  It is estimated that 4–5 million deaths per year could be averted if the global population was more active.
One in 4 adults and 4 in 5 adolescents don’t do enough physical activity. Women and girls generally are less active than men and boys, widening health inequalities. Older adults and people living with disabilities are also less likely to be active and miss out on the physical, mental and social health benefits. Physical inactivity burdens society through the hidden and growing cost of medical care and loss of productivity.
WHO developed an
economic analysis
which predicts that nearly 500 million new cases of preventable major NCDs will occur globally between 2020 and  2030 if the prevalence of physical inactivity does not change. These NCDs will cost an estimated US $300 billion in healthcare costs alone in that 11 year period, or about US$ 27 billion per year. These estimates do not include the significant indirect costs including loss of productivity.
Failing to increase levels of physical activity will negatively impact attainment of global targets as well as multiple SDGs.
WHO response
In response to the urgent need to address physical inactivity levels worldwide, WHO developed the
Global action plan on physical activity 2018–2030 (GAPPA): more active people for a healthier world
.
WHO
supports countries and stakeholders to implement the recommended actions by:
setting global      policy and guidelines, underpinned by latest evidence and consensus, which      are developed to help countries develop appropriate policies, investment      cases and financing mechanisms to increase levels of physical activity      among all populations;
providing global      tools and resources including toolkits and training packages to      promote key activities, such as walking and cycling; integrating physical      activity into primary health care; and innovations using digital platforms      to help change behaviours. Capacity building is supported with WHO      Academy courses, workshops and other knowledge exchange activities;
coordinating and      collaborating across sectors including sports, transport, education and      environment sectors to provide safe places and opportunities for physical      activity for everyone and to inform the development of norms and policy that      amplify key messages; and
monitoring global      progress on implementation of the
Global action plan on physical      activity
through the
Global status report
, and levels of      physical inactivity through instruments such as
Global physical activity questionnaire (GPAQ)
and the
Global school-based student health survey (GSHS)
.
WHO reports to the World Health Assembly on the global progress to increase physical activity by 15% by 2030, and GAPPA milestones of 2026 and 2030.
Fact sheets
Physical activity
Databases and tools
Global physical activity questionnaire (GPAQ)
Global Health Observatory: Prevalence of insufficient physical activity among school going adolescents aged 11-17 years
Global Health Observatory: Prevalence of insufficient physical activity among adults aged 18+ years
Global Health Observatory: Prevalence of insufficient physical activity in adults over 70
Initiatives and groups
Let's be active
Resolutions and decisions
WHA 77.12 Strengthening health and well-being through sport events
WHA 71.6 WHO global action plan on physical activity
WHA 55.23 Diet, physical activity and health
Technical work
More physical activity
News
All →
16 October 2024
News release
Qatar-WHO partnership leaves legacy for safer, healthier mega-sporting events
18 September 2024
Joint News Release
FIFA and World Health Organization launch global concussion awareness campaign
25 July 2024
News release
WHO teams up with IOC and France to support healthy Paris Olympics
26 June 2024
News release
Nearly 1.8 billion adults at risk of disease from not doing enough physical activity
Latest publications
All →
5 June 2025
Noncommunicable diseases progress monitor 2025
The fifth in a series, the World Health Organization's 2025 Noncommunicable Diseases (NCD) Progress Monitor provides a snapshot of country progress toward...
Download
Read More
8 May 2025
Promoting walking and cycling: a toolkit of policy options
This toolkit presents a compendium of policy options for walking and cycling, highlighting the multiple benefits that promoting and enabling safe walking...
Download
Read More
10 March 2025
Getting children moving using active video games: a report of the GenMove programme
The GenMove programme was developed as part of Healthy FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022 – Creating a Legacy for Sport and Health. This report outlines the...
Download
Read More
29 December 2024
Integrated care for older people (‎ICOPE)‎: guidance for person-centred assessment and pathways in primary...
The ICOPE handbook supports health and care workers to put evidence- based recommendations into practice in primary care including community. The handbook...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Building policy to promote physical activity
Ensuring access to sports for all
Promoting walking, cycling and other forms of active mobility
Strengthening partnerships across sectors to promote physical activity
Feature stories
All →
24 October 2025
Using data to expand safe active travel
24 May 2024
Basketball star and childhood obesity control champion Pau Gasol joins Walk the Talk Geneva
24 May 2024
Olympic champion David Rudisha to lead master running class at Walk the Talk Geneva
3 May 2024
Marcel Hug, world champion and Swiss Paralympic wheelchair racer, to take part in Walk the Talk Geneva
Infographics
All →
Infographic
WHO Guidelines on Physical Activity and Sedentary Behaviour
Infographic
For better health children 1-2 years age should have each day
Infographic
For better health children 3-4 years age should have each day
Infographic
Levels of physical activity
Videos
All →
19 July 2024
Global data on levels of physical inactivity in adult populations -a wakeup call
19 October 2022
Let’s get moving! - WHO's status report on physical activity 2022
25 November 2020
Every move counts
7 February 2020
Let's be active for health for all
Events
All →
Global webinar: 8th UN Global Road Safety Week “Make Walking and Cycling Safe”
12 May 2025 13:00 – 14:30 CET
Webinar: A deep dive into the development of new WHO global comparable estimates of physical inactivity in adults
3 July 2024 15:00 – 16:15 CET
Launch of new WHO estimates of physical inactivity in adults
2 July 2024 14:00 – 15:30 CET
2024
Walk the Talk Geneva 2024
26 May 2024 09:00 – 11:00 CET
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Physical environment
Air pollution
Diseases and conditions
Cardiovascular diseases
Diseases and conditions
Diabetes
Behavioural interventions
Health promotion
Diseases and conditions
Hypertension
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Human behaviour
Nutrition
Conditions
Obesity
Physical environment
Road traffic injuries
Socio-political determinants
Urban health