Refugee and migrant health - Global
Skip to main content
Overview
Today there are some 1 billion migrants globally, about 1 in 8 of the global population. These include 281 million international migrants and 82.4 million forcibly displaced (48 million internally displaced, 26.4 million refugees, 4.1 million asylum seekers)
(1)
. UNHCR estimates there are many millions of stateless people globally.
The experience of migration is a key determinant of health and well-being. Refugees and migrants remain among the most vulnerable members of society faced often with xenophobia; discrimination; poor living, housing, and working conditions; and inadequate access to health services, despite frequently occurring physical and mental health problems.
The COVID-19 pandemic has posed additional challenges both in terms of increased risk of infection and death experienced by refugees and migrants and has highlighted existing inequities in access to and utilization of health services. Refugees and migrants have also suffered the negative economic impact of lockdown and travel restrictions.
Refugees and migrants need to be in good health to protect both themselves and host populations. They have the human right to health, and countries have an obligation to provide refugee and migrant sensitive health care services.
In 2020 WHO established the Health and Migration Programme (PHM) to provide global leadership in health and migration issues in the context of WHO’s own
Global action plan: promoting the health of refugees and migrants 2019–23.
[1] https://www.unhcr.org/refugee-statistics/
Impact
Refugees and migrants often come from communities affected by war, conflict or economic crisis, with vulnerabilities related to the condition of their journeys such as inadequate access to food and water, sanitation and other basic services. They are at risk of communicable diseases, accidental injuries, hypothermia, burns, unwanted pregnancy and delivery-related complications, and various noncommunicable diseases. Moreover, refugees and migrants are at risk of poor mental health outcomes. Refugee and migrant health are also strongly related to the social determinants of health in host communities (e.g., employment, income, education and housing).
To promote public health protection for them and the host populations, refugees and migrants should have equitable access to quality health services, free of discrimination, exclusion and stigma. In addition, appropriate multisectoral public policy responses are required to address the social determinants.
Refugees and migrants also play a key employment role in the provision of health and social services, and access to health services for the populations recognizes this contribution and contributes to social well-being and cohesion.
The WHO Health and Migration Programme (PHM) works with countries to promote the human right to health and access to quality and culturally appropriate health services, with adequate social and financial protection.
WHO response
The WHO
Global action plan: promoting the health or refugees and migrants
(GAP) was agreed by the World Health Assembly in
2019. The GAP is part of an international framework established by the
United Nations to manage global migration positively, including the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and two global compacts, the
Global Compact on Refugees (GCR) and the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration (GCM).
The WHO
Global action plan
has six key priorities:
promote the health of refugees and migrants through a mix of short-term and long-term public health interventions;
promote continuity and quality of essential health care, while developing, reinforcing and implementing occupational health and safety measures;
advocate the mainstreaming of refugee and migrant health into global, regional and country agendas and the promotion of refugee-sensitive and migrant-sensitive health policies and legal and social protection; the health and well-being of refugee and migrant women, children and adolescents; gender equality and empowerment of refugee and migrant women and girls; and partnerships and intersectoral, intercountry and interagency coordination and collaboration mechanisms;
enhance capacity to tackle the social determinants of health and to accelerate progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, including universal health coverage;
strengthen health monitoring and health information systems; and
support measures to improve evidence-based health communication and to counter misconceptions about migrant and refugee health.
WHO Health and Migration Programme (PHM) aims to implement the
Global action plan
to promote and secure the health rights of refugees and
migrants by providing global leadership in health and migration issues.
Fact sheets
Refugee and migrant health
Refugee and migrant mental health
Questions and answers
Refugee and migrant health
Databases and tools
Refugee and migrant health toolkit
The UHC partnership
The triple billion dashboard
Resolutions and decisions
Promoting the health of refugees and migrants: global action plan, 2019–2023
Promoting the health of refugees and migrants - Draft framework of priorities and guiding principles to promote the health of refugees and migrants (A70/24)
Health of migrants (WHA61.17)
Technical work
Health and Migration Programme
News
All →
25 September 2025
Departmental update
Leaving no one behind: a call to advance noncommunicable diseases and mental health equity for migrants and refugees at UNGA80
6 August 2025
Departmental update
Climate change and global health: WHO calls for migrant-inclusive and climate-resilient health systems
20 May 2025
Departmental update
No health without inclusion: Leaders call for equitable action on noncommunicable diseases for migrants and refugees at WHA78
7 April 2025
Departmental update
A call to safeguard maternal and newborn health for migrants
Latest publications
All 	→
29 July 2025
Health system strengthening interventions to improve the health of displaced and migrant populations...
This is the seventh report in the Global Evidence Review on Health and Migration (GEHM) series. The publication examines how health systems are responding...
Download
Read More
31 March 2025
Dementia in refugees and migrants: epidemiology, public health implications and global responses
This is the sixth report of the Global Evidence Review on Health and Migration (GEHM) series. The publication examines the challenges faced by older refugees...
Download
Read More
7 December 2024
WHO global action plan on promoting the health of refugees and migrants, 2019–2030
In 2017, the Seventieth World Health Assembly considered the report on promoting the health of refugees and migrants (A70/24) and the decision of the Executive...
Download
Read More
7 November 2024
Strengthening health systems to improve the health of displaced and migrant populations in the context...
The WHO Global research agenda on health, migration and displacement identified the health of displaced and migrant populations in the context of climate...
Download
Read More
Documents
All 	→
26 March 2025
Fifth Global School on refugee and migrant health
The Fifth Global School on Refugee and Migrant Health, held in Colombia from December 2–6, 2024, focused on advancing universal health coverage for...
Download
Read More
11 October 2024
WHO Investment case deep dive: health and migration
The investment case deep dive takes a closer look at WHO’s work in refugee and migrant health. Looking across the Fourteenth General Programme of...
Download
Read More
17 July 2024
Sudan conflict and refugee crisis, Multi-country External Situation Report #2-17 July 2024
This is the second WHO report summarizing the multi-country health situation and WHO’s response across the regional emergency caused by the conflict...
Download
Read More
30 October 2023
Global research agenda on health, migration and displacement
This document provides an overview of the first-ever WHO Global research agenda on health, migration and displacement.
Download
Read More
Our work
Strengthening health sector response to gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies
Promoting the health of refugees and migrants during COVID-19 pandemic
Setting evidence-informed norms and standards on refugee and migrant health
Strengthening health information systems for refugee- and migrant-sensitive healthcare
Feature stories
All →
18 June 2025
Donors making a difference: refugees and migrants
24 July 2024
﻿Donors making a difference: Japan supports WHO’s work to improve health services and emergency response
12 July 2024
Donors making a difference for WHO’s work to save lives in Sudan and South Sudan
18 June 2024
Development partners making a difference: The European Union supports WHO in eight Asian countries to prepare for the future
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Flyer for the First Global Engagement Webinar on the WHO Global Research Agenda on Health, Migration and Displacement
Infographic
Infographic: The right to health is a human right
Infographic
Health for all, including refugees and migrants: time to act now
Infographic
Infographic: The right to health means leaving no one behind
Videos
All →
28 May 2025
WHO Global Research Agenda on health, migration and displacement
16 April 2025
Poland: Listening to refugees' trauma, rebuilding hope ­– WHO's achievement in countries
18 December 2024
WHO Health and Migration Dashboard Launch Video - Director, HMP
1 September 2024
WHO Global Competency Standards e-course: provision of health services to refugees and migrants
Events
All 	→
Sixth WHO Global School on Refugee and Migrant Health
9 – 11 December 2025
Inaugural launch webinar: WHO Technical Advisory Group on Health, Migration and Displacement
25 November 2025 10:00 – 11:00 CET
COP30 high-level event: health, migration and displacement in a changing climate
12 November 2025 09:00 – 10:00 Brazil Time
Related health topics
Health systems
Health workforce
Other
Universal health coverage
Other
Health equity
Socio-political determinants
Social determinants of health
Behavioural interventions
Health promotion
Health systems
Health systems governance