Transplantation
Skip to main content
Overview
Transplantation of human cells, tissues or organs is the best – and often the only – way to save lives for people with serious or life-threatening diseases and injuries.
Transplantation involves replacing non-functional cells, tissues or organs with healthy counterparts that are obtained from another individual through voluntary donation during their lifetime or after their death.
Access to transplantation varies a lot between countries, as does the safety, quality, efficacy of donation and transplantation of human cells, tissues and organs. Growth and development of transplantation worldwide is highly unequal and faces many challenges including:
lack of national strategies for transplantation;
inadequate legislation, ethical frameworks and regulation, which may allow for practices such as organ trafficking;
lack of donation, processing and transplantation infrastructure;
deficient universal health coverage, meaning that access to transplantation is excluded; and
low awareness and engagement amongst the public and healthcare professionals.
Ethical concerns are a major issue. The shortage of organs can lead to illegal activities, like trafficking in body parts for transplants.
Research into alternatives, like using animal products (xenotransplantation) or bioengineered materials, is progressing. These could help reduce the need for human donations but aren’t yet a full replacement. Even when they become available, high costs might limit access. For now, ensuring access to human cells, tissues, and organs for transplantation remains critical.
Impact
The benefits of tissue transplantation include survival after severe burn trauma, recovery of movement, closure of chronic wounds, rehabilitation of heart function and restoration of sight. Tissue transplants allow many recipients to return to economically productive lives and promote their independence.
Organ transplantation is often the best if not the only treatment for acute and chronic organ failure. Non-communicable diseases such as diabetes and arterial hypertension, combined with various social determinants such as alcoholism and obesity, may lead to chronic kidney disease and liver cirrhosis. In terms of survival, quality of life and cost-effectiveness, kidney transplantation has better outcomes than dialysis. In chronic or acute liver failure, as well as some cardio-respiratory conditions, transplantation is the only option.
Over 1.5 million patients have undergone haematopoietic stem cell transplant, primarily for haematological cancer. Its potential for treating non-malignant disorders and genetic diseases such as sickle cell anaemia and thalassemia with this type of transplant is increasingly recognized. Previously, only limited treatment options were available, and with no hope of cure.
WHO response
Initiated by the Fortieth World Health Assembly, the
WHO Guiding principles on human cell, tissue and organ transplantation
are a significant contribution to this area of health care, providing an orderly, ethical and acceptable framework for the acquisition and transplantation of human cells, tissues and organs for therapeutic purposes. They were updated in 2020 (
WHA Resolution 63.22
) to reflect changes in practices and attitudes, and they continue to greatly influence the development of appropriate professional codes and practices, as well as legislation, around the world.
Following a
WHO report
showing a lack of progress in the development of transplantation worldwide, the World Health Assembly adopted
a new resolution in 2024 (77.4) on increasing availability, ethical access and oversight of transplantation of human cells, tissues and organs
. The resolution calls for:
Member States to strengthen regulatory frameworks, integrate transplantation into health care systems, increase deceased donation rates, protect living donors from harm and exploitation, and raise public awareness.
WHO to support Member States through the development of a Global strategy on donation and transplantation.
WHO acknowledges the different needs and resources of health systems, the importance of respecting previous and current initiatives, and the commonalities among the established transplantation activities. To ensure relevance, it relies on the expertise of its advisory bodies and extended expert consultations, as well as the continued work with collaborating centres and non-State actors.
Databases and tools
Global observatory on donation and transplantation (GODT)
NOTIFY Library
Resolutions and decisions
WHA57.18 - Human organ and tissue transplantation
WHA63.22 - Human organ and tissue transplantation
WHA77.4 - Increasing availability, ethical access and oversight of transplantation of human cells, tissues and organs
A70/19 - Principles on the donation and management of blood, blood components and other medical products of human origin
A75/41 - Human organ and tissue transplantation
Technical work
Health products policy and standards
Blood and other products of human origin
News
All →
30 May 2024
Note for Media
Seventy-seventh World Health Assembly – Daily update: 30 May 2024
25 April 2024
Departmental update
Spain's Secretary of State for Health discusses health priorities with WHO
1 September 2010
Departmental update
WHO launches NOTIFY project
9 June 2007
Departmental update
Working towards harmonization of a global glossary on donation and transplantation
Latest publications
All →
30 June 2025
Access to safe, effective and quality-assured health products and technologies
The roadmap for WHO action 2025–2030 outlines to Member States, and other stakeholders WHO’s unique role and approach for increasing access...
Download
Read More
22 September 2014
Clinical criteria for the determination of death, WHO technical expert consultation, WHO Headquarters,...
The aim of this technical expert consultation was to decipher this issue and reach
universally accepted criteria.
Download
Read More
18 October 2011
Second WHO Global Consultation on
Regulatory Requirements for
Xenotransplantation Clinical Trials
The charge to the consultation was: 1) To review the current status of xenotransplantation science and practice;2) To determine whether updates to...
Download
Read More
30 May 2010
WHO guiding principles on human cell, tissue and organ transplantation
WHO guiding principles on human cell, tissue and organ transplantation - as endorsed by the sixty-third World Health Assembly in May 2010, in Resolution...
Download
Read More
Documents
All →
11 November 2025
Development of a Global Strategy for Donation & Transplantation of human cells, tissues and organs
This document provides the background and an annotated outline for the Global Strategy on the donation and transplantation of human cells, tissues, and...
Download
Read More
30 September 2012
WHO Standard Organ Transplant Nomenclature (Version 1.0)
Standardization of Organ Nomenclature Globally, Collaboratively Developed by WHO and ICCBBA through the SONG project.
Download
Read More
4 May 2011
First Advisory Meeting for the SONG project (Standardization of Organ Nomenclature Globally) in collaboration...
This initial framework is proposed to stimulate a discussion within the donation/transplantation community, regarding the essential information that will...
Download
Read More
9 June 2007
Global Glossary on Donation and Transplantation
The lack of a globally recognized terminology and definitions as well as the need for a uniform collection
of data and information for the Global Database...
Download
Read More
Related health topics
Substances
Biologicals
Physiological interventions
Blood products
Health systems
Blood transfusion safety
Diseases and conditions
Eye care, vision impairment and blindness
Diseases and conditions
Noncommunicable diseases
Health systems
Patient safety