Drugs
Skip to main content
Overview
Psychoactive drugs are substances that, when taken in or administered into one's system, affect mental processes, e.g. perception, consciousness, cognition or mood and emotions. Psychoactive drugs belong to a broader category of psychoactive substances
that include also alcohol and nicotine.  “Psychoactive” does not necessarily imply dependence-producing, and in common parlance, the term is often left unstated, as in “drug use”, “substance use” or “substance
abuse”.
Production, distribution, sale or non-medical use of many psychoactive drugs is either controlled or prohibited outside legally sanctioned channels by law. Psychoactive drugs have different degrees of restriction of availability, depending on their
risks to health and therapeutic usefulness, and classified according to a hierarchy of schedules at both national and international levels. At the international level, there are international drug conventions concerned with the control of production
and distribution of psychoactive drugs: the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, amended by a 1972 Protocol; the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances; the 1988 Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.
Impact
The use of psychoactive drugs without medical supervision is associated with significant health risks and can lead to the development of drug use disorders. Drug use disorders, particularly when untreated, increase morbidity and mortality risks for individuals, can trigger substantial suffering and lead to impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning. Drug use disorders are associated with significant costs to society due to lost productivity, premature mortality, increased health care expenditure, and costs related to criminal justice, social welfare, and other social consequences.
About 296 million people aged 15-64 had used psychoactive drugs in 2021 and about 39.5 million people are estimated to be affected by drug use disorders (harmful pattern of drug use or drug dependence). It is estimated that about 0.6 million death annually are attributable to drug use with about 420 000 male and 160 000 female deaths. More than 36 million years of healthy life loss (DALY) were attributable to drug use in 2019. It is estimated that worldwide there are almost 14.8 million people who inject drugs, of whom 15.2% live with HIV and 38.8% - with hepatitis C.
WHO response
Since its creation, WHO has played an important role within the UN system in addressing the world drug problem. WHO activities to counter the world drug problem can be presented under the following main dimensions:
prevention of drug use and reduction of vulnerability and risks;
treatment and care of people with drug use disorders;
prevention and management of the harms associated with drug use;
access to controlled medicines; and
monitoring and evaluation.
Target 3.5 of UN Sustainable Development Goal 3 sets out a commitment by governments to strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse. Several other targets are also of particular relevance to drug policy-related health issues, especially target 3.3, referring to ending the AIDS epidemic and combating viral hepatitis; target 3.4, on preventing and treating noncommunicable diseases and promoting mental health; target 3.8, on achieving universal health coverage; and target 3.b, with its reference to providing access to affordable essential medicines.
In April 2016, the thirtieth Special Session of the UN General Assembly (UNGASS) reviewed the progress in the implementation of the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation Towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem and assessed the achievements and challenges. In resolution S-30/1, the General Assembly adopted the outcome document of the special session on the world drug problem entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem”. The UNGASS marked a shift in the overall drug policy discourse to highlight the public health and human rights dimensions of the world drug problem and to achieve a better balance between supply reduction and public health measures.
Fact sheets
Opioid overdose
Questions and answers
WHO Expert Committee on Drug Dependence review of cannabis
Databases and tools
Resources for the Prevention and Treatment of Substance Use Disorders
Disease burden and mortality estimates
Resolutions and decisions
Progress report by the Director-General to the Seventy-first World Health Assembly (WHA71/41 Rev.2) on the Public health dimension of the world drug problem (decision WHA70(18) (2017)
WHA70(18) Decision on the Public health dimension of the world drug problem
Report by the Secretariat to the Seventieth World Health Assembly (A70/29) “Public health dimension of the world drug problem
Report by the Secretariat to the Sixty-ninth World Health Assembly (A69/12) “Public health dimension of the world drug problem including in the context of the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on the World Drug Problem held in April 2016
United Nations General Assembly Special Session 2016 on the world drug problem outcome document (A/S-30/L.1) “Our joint commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem”.
Public health dimension of the world drug problem A75/43 (2022)
Public health dimension of the world drug problem A77/33/H (2024)
Technical work
Alcohol, Drugs and Addictive Behaviours Unit
Expert Committee on Drug Dependence
Mental Health, Brain Health and Substance Use Department
Global HIV, Hepatitis and STIs Programme
Management of noncommunicable diseases
News
All →
13 March 2025
News release
UN Commission approves WHO recommendations to place psychoactive substances under international control
9 February 2025
Departmental update
WHO updates guidelines on opioid dependence treatment and overdose prevention
25 June 2024
News release
Over 3 million annual deaths due to alcohol and drug use, majority among men
28 March 2024
Departmental update
WHO joins 67th session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
Publications
All →
13 October 2025
Opioid agonist maintenance treatment as an essential health service: implementation guidance on mitigating...
Opioid agonist maintenance treatment (OAMT) for people with opioid dependence is proven to be safe and effective in addressing a broad range of health...
Download
Read More
23 July 2025
WHO guideline on balanced national controlled medicines policies to ensure medical access and safety
Access to medicines is essential for attainment of universal health coverage, which is central to
achievement of the health-related Sustainable Development...
Download
Read More
14 May 2025
WHO guideline on balanced national controlled medicines policies to ensure medical access and safety:...
WHO recommends that essential medicines, including those that are controlled, be available to all patients at all times at a price that the individual...
Download
Read More
25 June 2024
Global status report on alcohol and health and treatment of substance use disorders
The Global status report on alcohol and health and treatment of substance use disorders presents a comprehensive overview of alcohol consumption, alcohol-related...
Download
Read More
Related joint publications
UNODC/WHO International Standards for the Treatment of Drug Use Disorders
31 March 2020  | Publication
UNODC/WHO International Standards on Drug Use Prevention
Second updated version
UNESCO/UNODC/WHO publication "Education sector responses to the use of alcohol, tobacco and drugs"
UNESCO/UNODC/WHO publication "Treatment and care for people with drug use disorders in contact with the criminal justice system"
Our work
Improving prevention and treatment for drug use disorders
Information sheet
Cannabis
Events
All →
The Technical Advisory Group on Alcohol and Drug Epidemiology (TAG-ADE
8 – 9 July 2025
Fifth WHO Forum on Alcohol, Drugs and Addictive Behaviours (FADAB)
24 – 26 June 2025
Videos
All →
27 October 2020
Drug overdose: a film about life
3 December 2018
UN Toolkit on Synthetic Drugs
Related health topics
Other
Alcohol
Communicable diseases
HIV
Health and wellbeing
Mental health
Physical environment
Road traffic injuries
Substances
Tobacco