Cancer
Skip to main content
Overview
Cancer is a large group of diseases that can start in almost any organ or tissue of the body when abnormal cells grow uncontrollably, go beyond their usual boundaries to invade adjoining parts of the body and/or spread to other organs. The latter process is called metastasizing and is a major cause of death from cancer. A neoplasm and malignant tumour are other common names for cancer.
Cancer is the second leading cause of death globally, accounting for an estimated 9.6 million deaths, or 1 in 6 deaths, in 2018. Lung, prostate, colorectal, stomach and liver cancer are the most common types of cancer in men, while breast, colorectal, lung, cervical and thyroid cancer are the most common among women.
The cancer burden continues to grow globally, exerting tremendous physical, emotional and financial strain on individuals, families, communities and health systems. Many health systems in low- and middle-income countries are least prepared to manage this burden, and large numbers of cancer patients globally do not have access to timely quality diagnosis and treatment. In countries where health systems are strong, survival rates of many types of cancers are improving thanks to accessible early detection, quality treatment and survivorship care.
Prevention
Between 30% and 50% of cancer deaths could be prevented by modifying or avoiding key risk factors and implementing existing evidence-based prevention strategies. The cancer burden can also be reduced through early detection of cancer and management of patients who develop cancer. Prevention also offers the most cost-effective long-term strategy for the control of cancer.
Modifying or avoiding the following key risk factors can help prevent cancer:
avoid tobacco use, including cigarettes and smokeless tobacco;
maintain a healthy weight;
eat a healthy diet with plenty of fruit and vegetables;
exercise regularly;
limit alcohol use;
practice safe sex;
get vaccinated against hepatitis B and human papillomavirus (HPV);
reduce exposure to ultraviolet radiation;
prevent unnecessary ionizing radiation exposure (e.g. minimize occupational exposure, ensure safe and appropriate medical use of radiation in diagnosis and treatment);
avoid urban air pollution and indoor smoke from household use of solid fuels;
get regular medical care; and
some chronic infections are also risk factors for cancer. People in low- and middle-income countries are more likely to develop cancer through chronic infections.
Management
Cancer is more likely to respond to effective treatment when identified early, resulting in a greater probability of surviving as well as less morbidity and less expensive treatment.
There are two distinct strategies that promote early detection:
Early diagnosis identifies symptomatic cancer cases at the earliest possible stage.
Screening aims to identify individuals with abnormalities suggestive of a specific cancer or pre-cancer who have not developed any symptoms and refer them promptly for diagnosis and treatment
.
Treatment options include surgery, cancer medicines and/or radiotherapy, administered alone or in combination. A multidisciplinary team of cancer professionals recommends the best possible treatment plan based on tumour type, cancer stage, clinical and other factors. The choice of treatment should be informed by patients’ preferences and consider the capacity of the health system.
Palliative care, which focuses on improving the quality of life of patients and their families, is an essential component of cancer care. Survivorship care includes a detailed plan for monitoring cancer recurrence and detection of new cancers, assessing and managing long-term effects associated with cancer and/or its treatment, and services to ensure that cancer survivor needs are met.
Fact sheets
Breast cancer
Cancer
Childhood cancer
Cervical cancer
Databases and tools
IARC Global Cancer Observatory
Global Platform for Access to Childhood Cancer Medicines
Initiatives and groups
Cervical cancer elimination initiative
The Global breast cancer initiative
The Global initiative for childhood cancer
Resolutions and decisions
WHA70.12 Cancer prevention and control in the context of an integrated approach
WHA58.22 Cancer prevention and control
Technical work
Noncommunicable diseases, rehabilitation and disability
News
All →
17 November 2025
News release
World marks cervical cancer elimination day as countries accelerate action
6 November 2025
Departmental update
WHO sets new global standard for child-friendly cancer drugs, paving way for industry innovation
22 September 2025
Departmental update
WHO publishes new R&D landscape analyses highlighting gaps and inequities in cancer research
5 September 2025
News release
WHO updates list of essential medicines to include key cancer, diabetes treatments
Latest publications
All →
9 September 2025
Cancer research and development landscape: overview of 1999-2022 period ﻿
Despite significant progress
in therapeutic development,
cancer is still associated with
a substantial global disease
burden, which is projected...
Download
Read More
6 August 2025
Eradicating cervical cancer in Thailand: A journey of hope and progress
Thailand has made significant progress in cervical cancer control and is on track to achieve the 90-70-90 targets by 2030, particularly through HPV vaccination...
Download
Read More
5 June 2025
Noncommunicable diseases progress monitor 2025
The fifth in a series, the World Health Organization's 2025 Noncommunicable Diseases (NCD) Progress Monitor provides a snapshot of country progress toward...
Download
Read More
27 January 2025
Clinical research landscape of monoclonal antibodies
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are artificial proteins that mimic the body’s natural defences and represent an important medical innovation in modern...
Download
Read More
Our work
All →
Amplifying the lived experience of people affected by cancer
Controlling cancer
Ensuring quality cancer treatment
Immunizing against HPV
Feature stories
All →
18 March 2025
One man’s dream of a hepatitis-free Tanzania
27 November 2024
Get the Conversation to Cancer: #Dukutober Challenge Accepted
27 November 2024
Co-creating cancer priorities with those affected by cancer
15 November 2024
Sallay Carew’s rally in Sierra Leone to eliminate cervical cancer
Infographics
All →
Infographic
Men and breast cancer
Infographic
Incidence rate in women breast cancer
Infographic
3 steps to bridge the survival gap
Infographic
Breast cancer has high cure rates when detected and treated early
Videos
All →
17 June 2025
From commitment to action: countries unite to eliminate cervical cancer
11 February 2025
Childhood cancer medicines: WHO and St. Jude launch groundbreaking international platform for access
16 October 2024
WHO press conference on global health issues – 16 October 2024
3 October 2024
WHO press conference on global health issues – 3 October 2024
Events
All →
2025
World Cervical Cancer Elimination Day 2025
17 November 2025
Webinar: GAP-f private sector entities dialogue 2025
11 November 2025 13:00 – 16:00 CET
Breast Cancer Awareness Month 2025
1 – 31 October 2025
Global Cervical Cancer Elimination Forum 2025
17 – 19 June 2025
Country profiles
Country profiles
Country profiles present selected data, statistics and information to provide national health profiles at given points in time.
GO
Related health topics
Non-communicable diseases
Cervical cancer