Lidocaine Viscous Oral Rinse: MedlinePlus Drug Information
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
(
Lock
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
→
→
Lidocaine Viscous Oral Rinse
Lidocaine Viscous Oral Rinse
pronounced as (lye' doe kane)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Lidocaine viscous may cause serious side effects or death in infants or children under 3 years of age if not used as recommended. Do not use lidocaine viscous to treat teething pain. Only use lidocaine viscous in infants or children under 3 years when prescribed by your doctor. Do not use more of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Store this medication tightly closed and safely out of reach of children. Discard unused medication out of reach of children and pets.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lidocaine viscous mouth rinse is used to relieve pain of inflammation or sores of the mouth or throat.
It is also used to reduce gagging during x-rays of the mouth or dental x-rays.
Lidocaine is a local anesthetic.
It works by blocking nerves from sending pain signals.
How should this medicine be used?
Lidocaine viscous oral rinse comes as a solution (liquid) to be used in the mouth or throat.
Lidocaine viscous mouth rinse is used as needed but not more frequently than every 3 hours. Do not use more than 8 hours in a 24 hour period.
For a sore or irritated mouth, the dose should be placed in the mouth, swished around until the pain goes away, and spit out.
For a sore throat, the dose should be gargled and then may be swallowed. To avoid or decrease side effects, use the minimum amount of drug needed to relieve your pain.
For children and infants, use a measuring device to carefully measure the correct dose. Apply the medication to the affected area using a cotton-tipped applicator.
Shake the liquid well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
Use lidocaine viscous oral rinse exactly as directed.   Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Because lidocaine viscous decreases the feeling in your mouth and/or throat, it may affect your ability to swallow. Avoid eating for at least 1 hour after you have used this drug. You should also avoid chewing gum while using this medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using lidocaine viscous,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using lidocaine, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually used as needed. If your doctor has told you to use lidocaine viscous oral rinse regularly, use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
lightheadedness, nervousness, confusion, dizziness, drowsiness, ear ringing, double or blurred vision, twitching, tremors
rash, itching, swelling, feeling of throat closing, difficulty breathing
Lidocaine viscous may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location - one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xylocaine
®
Viscous
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
11/15/2025