COVID-19 Vaccine, Adjuvanted: MedlinePlus Drug Information
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
(
Lock
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
→
→
COVID-19 Vaccine, Adjuvanted
COVID-19 Vaccine, Adjuvanted
Why get vaccinated?
How is the vaccine given?
What should you tell the person who is giving the vaccine?
What are the risks from vaccination?
How can I learn more?
Brand names
Other names
Why get vaccinated?
COVID-19 Vaccine, Adjuvanted can prevent COVID-19 disease or lower risk of serious illness from the infection.
Infection with SARS-CoV-2 can cause COVID-19 disease which may present as fever or chills, cough, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, sore throat, congestion or runny nose, loss of taste or smell, fatigue, muscle aches or body pains, headache, nausea or vomiting, diarrhea. In some cases, the disease can be severe enough to cause hospitalization and/or death. The vaccine contains a protein from the virus that triggers the body to formulate an immune response so that when it is exposed to the full virus, it will respond to it quickly and stop the virus from advancing in the body.
How is the vaccine given?
COVID-19 Vaccine, Adjuvanted comes as a suspension (liquid)to be given intramuscularly (into the muscle) by a healthcare provider.
COVID-19 Vaccine, Adjuvanted is given as a single dose for the season. It should be given at least two months after receiving any dose of any COVID-19 vaccine.
What should you tell the person who is giving the vaccine?
Tell your vaccine provider if you:
have had an allergic reaction to this vaccine, any part of this vaccine, any other vaccine or any drug, food or substance. Tell your vaccine provider about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
have or have had myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) or pericarditis (inflammation of the lining outside the heart), a bleeding disorder or are taking a blood thinner, a weakened immune system or are on a medicine that affects your immune system.
have a fever or are feeling unwell.
have ever received any other COVID-19 vaccine.
have ever fainted in association with an injection.
are pregnant or are breast-feeding. Safety of COVID-19 vaccine, mRNA during pregnancy is not known but COVID-19 infection can have adverse outcomes during pregnancy. Pregnant patients should talk to their doctors about risks and benefits of receiving a COVID-19, mRNA vaccine during pregnancy.
In some cases, your health care provider may decide to postpone vaccination to a future visit.
What are the risks from vaccination?
Side effects that have been reported with the COVID-19 Vaccine, Adjuvanted include:
pain, redness, swelling at the injection site
tiredness or general ill feeling
headache
muscle or joint pain
nausea or vomiting
fever
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
difficulty breathing; swelling of face or throat; fast heartbeat; rash; dizziness or weakness
You should know that COVID-19, mRNA vaccine may increase risk of myocarditis or pericarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle or lining of the heart). Symptoms most commonly occur in the week following vaccination and is more commonly seen in males 12 to 24 years of age. Seek emergency medical treatment if you experience any of the following: chest pain; shortness of breath; feelings of having a fast-beating, fluttering or pounding heart.
People sometimes faint after medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your provider if you feel dizzy or have vision changes or ringing in the ears.
Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself. Visit
https://vaers.hhs.gov
or call
1-800-822-7967
.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions, and VAERS staff members do not give medical advice.
How can I learn more?
Read the Vaccine Information Sheet (VIS) that your vaccine provider will give you or you can obtain it at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/current-vis/index.html
Ask your healthcare provider.
Call your local or state health department.
Brand names
Nuvaxoid
®
Other names
NVX-CoV2373
Novavax COVID-19 Vaccine
Last Revised -
10/20/2024