Olanzapine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
(
Lock
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
→
→
Olanzapine Injection
Olanzapine Injection
pronounced as (oh lan' za peen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
For people being treated with olanzapine extended-release (long-acting) injection:
When you receive olanzapine extended-release injection, the medication is usually released slowly into your blood over a period of time. However, when you receive olanzapine extended-release injection, there is a small chance that olanzapine may be released into your blood too quickly. If this happens, you may experience a serious problem called Post-injection Delirium Sedation Syndrome (PDSS). PDSS may cause dizziness, confusion, difficulty thinking clearly, anxiety, irritability, aggressive behavior, weakness, slurred speech, difficulty walking, muscle stiffness or shaking, seizures, drowsiness, and coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time). You are most likely to experience these symptoms during the first 3 hours after you receive the medication. You will receive olanzapine extended-release injection in a hospital, clinic, or other medical facility where you can receive emergency medical treatment if it is needed. You will need to remain in the facility for at least 3 hours after you receive the medication. While you are in the clinic, the medical staff will watch you closely for signs of PDSS. When you are ready to leave the facility, you will need a responsible person to be with you. Do not drive a car or operate machinery for the rest of the day. Get emergency medical help right away if you experience any symptoms of PDSS after you leave the facility.
A program has been set up to help people receive olanzapine extended-release injection safely. You will need to register and agree to the rules of this program before you receive olanzapine extended-release injection.  Ask your doctor if you have any questions about this program.
For people being treated with olanzapine extended-release injection or olanzapine injection:
Older adults with dementia (loss of memory and brain function) may have an increased chance of death if treated with antipsychotics.
Older adults with dementia may also have a greater chance of having a stroke or ministroke during treatment with antipsychotics.
Olanzapine injection and olanzapine extended-release injection are not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of behavior disorders in older adults with dementia.
Talk to the doctor who prescribed this medication if you, a family member, or someone you care for has dementia and is being treated with olanzapine injection or olanzapine extended-release injection.
You will be given the Medication Guide. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or
pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/
ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving olanzapine injection or olanzapine extended-release injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Olanzapine extended-release injection is used to treat schizophrenia (a mental illness that affects how a person thinks, feels and behaves). Olanzapine injection is used to treat episodes of agitation in people who have schizophrenia or in people who have bipolar I disorder (a disease that causes depression, mania, and other abnormal moods). Olanzapine is in a class of medications called atypical antipsychotics.
It works by changing the activity of certain natural substances in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Olanzapine injection and olanzapine extended-release injection come as powders to be mixed with water and injected into a muscle by a healthcare provider.
You will receive olanzapine injection as needed for agitation. If you are still agitated after you receive your first dose, you may be given one or more additional doses. You will receive olanzapine extended-release injection once every 2 to 4 weeks.
Olanzapine extended-release injection may help control your symptoms but will not cure your condition. Continue to keep appointments to receive olanzapine extended-release injection even if you feel well. Talk to your doctor if you do not feel like you are getting better during your treatment with olanzapine extended-release injection.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving olanzapine injection or olanzapine extended-release injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other
drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what
symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving olanzapine injection or olanzapine extended-release injection.
Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have a low number of white blood cells
or if any other medication has ever caused a decrease in your white blood cells.
Also tell your doctor if you use or have ever used street drugs or have overused prescription medications and if you have or have ever had a stroke,
a ministroke,
heart disease,
a heart attack,
heart failure, an irregular heartbeat,
seizures,
breast cancer,
any condition that makes it difficult for you to swallow,
trouble keeping your balance, high or low blood pressure,
a high level of fats (cholesterol and triglycerides) in your blood,
paralytic ileus (condition in which food cannot move through the intestine);
glaucoma (an eye condition),
high blood sugar,
diabetes,
or liver
or prostate disease.
Tell your doctor if you have severe vomiting, diarrhea or signs of dehydration now, or if you develop these symptoms at any time during your treatment.
Also tell your doctor if you have ever had to stop taking a medication for mental illness because of severe side effects or have or have had thoughts about harming or killing yourself.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, if you plan to become pregnant, or if you are breastfeeding.
If you become pregnant during your treatment with olanzapine injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are being treated with olanzapine injection.
you should know that receiving olanzapine injection or olanzapine extended-release injection may make you drowsy and may affect your ability to think clearly, make decisions, and react quickly.
Do not drive a car or operate machinery for the rest of the day after you receive olanzapine extended-release injection. Do not drive a car or operate machinery at other times during your treatment with olanzapine extended-release injection or during your treatment with olanzapine injection until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication.
Do not drink alcohol during your treatment with olanzapine.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products.
Cigarette smoking may decrease the effectiveness of this medication.
you should know that olanzapine injection and olanzapine extended-release injection may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, fast or slow heartbeat, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position, especially right after you receive your injection.
If you feel dizzy or drowsy after you receive your injection, you will need to lie down until you feel better.
During your treatment, you should get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that you may experience hyperglycemia (increases in your blood sugar) while you are taking this medication, even if you do not already have diabetes.
If you have schizophrenia, you are more likely to develop diabetes than people who do not have schizophrenia, and receiving olanzapine injection, olanzapine extended-release injection or similar medications may increase this risk.
Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms during your treatment: extreme thirst,
frequent urination,
extreme hunger,
blurred vision,
or weakness.
It is very important to call your doctor as soon as you have any of these symptoms, because high blood sugar can cause a serious condition called ketoacidosis.
Ketoacidosis may become life-threatening if it is not treated at an early stage.
Symptoms of ketoacidosis include dry mouth,
nausea and vomiting,
shortness of breath,
breath that smells fruity,
and decreased consciousness.
you should know that olanzapine injection or olanzapine extended-release injection may make it harder for your body to cool down when it gets very hot.
Tell your doctor if you plan to do vigorous exercise or be exposed to extreme heat.
Be sure to drink plenty of water and call your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms: feeling very hot,
sweating heavily,
not sweating even though it is hot,
dry mouth,
excessive thirst,
or decreased urination.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you forget to keep an appointment to receive olanzapine extended-release injection, call your doctor to schedule another appointment as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Olanzapine injection and olanzapine extended-release injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
increased appetite, weight gain
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
dry mouth
back or joint pain
headache
missed menstrual periods
breast enlargement or discharge
decreased sexual ability
pain, hardness, or a lump in the place where the medication was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
sore throat, fever, chills, or other signs of infection
fever; stiff muscles; sweating; confusion; sweating; or fast, pounding, or irregular
heartbeat
uncontrollable unusual movements of your face or body
falling down
difficulty swallowing
chest pain
seizures
rash that may occur with fever, swollen glands, or swelling of the face
skin redness or peeling
Olanzapine injection and olanzapine extended-release injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
dizziness
confusion, disorientation, slurred speech
difficulty walking
weakness
seizures
agitation
drowsiness
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to olanzapine injection or olanzapine extended-release injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about olanzapine injection or olanzapine extended-release injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zyprexa
®
Zyprexa Relprevv
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2025