Diazepam: MedlinePlus Drug Information
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
(
Lock
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
→
→
Diazepam
Diazepam
pronounced as (dye az' e pam)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Diazepam may cause serious or life-threatening breathing problems, drowsiness, or coma if used along with certain medications.
Tell your doctor if you are taking or plan to take medications for cough or for pain.
Call your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical care if you experience: unusual dizziness, lightheadedness, extreme sleepiness, slowed or difficult breathing, or unresponsiveness.
Be sure that your caregiver or family members know which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor or emergency medical care if you are unable to do so.
Diazepam may be habit forming. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or for a longer time than your doctor tells you to. Tell your doctor if you have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, if you use or have ever used street drugs, or have overused prescription medications. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression or another mental illness.
Do not stop taking this medication or take fewer doses without talking to your doctor.  Call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment if you experience any of the following symptoms: unusual movements; ringing in your ears; anxiety; memory problems; difficulty concentrating; sleep problems; seizures; shaking; muscle twitching; changes in mental health; depression; burning or prickling feeling in your hands, arms, legs or feet; seeing or hearing things that others do not see or hear; thoughts of harming or killing yourself or others; overexcitement; or losing touch with reality.
You will be given the Medication
Guide. Read
the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can
also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking diazepam.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Diazepam is used to relieve anxiety, control agitation caused by alcohol withdrawal, control muscle spasms and stiffness caused by certain nerve disorders, and to control seizures.
Diazepam is in a class of medications called benzodiazepines.
It works by calming abnormal overactivity in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Diazepam comes as a tablet, a solution (liquid), and as a concentrate (liquid) to take by mouth.
It is taken 1 to 4 times a day with or without food.
Take diazepam exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Diazepam concentrate comes with a specially marked dropper to measure the dose. Ask your pharmacist to show you how to use the dropper. Dilute the concentrate in water, juice, or carbonated beverages just before taking it. It also may be mixed with applesauce or pudding just before taking the dose. Stir the mixture gently for a few seconds. Take the entire mixture immediately; do not store it for future use.
If you are taking diazepam to control seizures, do not stop taking diazepam without talking to your doctor, even if you experience side effects such as unusual changes in behavior or mood. If you suddenly stop taking diazepam, your seizures may get worse.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking diazepam,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other
drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what
symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements, you are taking while taking diazepam.  Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with diazepam: allergy medications (diphenhydramine, loratadine, fexofenadine, chlorpheniramine or cetirizine), cimetidine, omeprazole. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking diazepam. Do not start any of these medications while taking diazepam without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have myasthenia gravis (a disorder of the nervous system that causes muscle weakness), sleep apnea (condition in which a person briefly stops breathing many times during the night), or lung or liver disease.
Also, tell your doctor if you have glaucoma (a serious eye condition that may cause loss of vision).
Your doctor may tell you not to take diazepam.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression or other mental illness; seizures; or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking diazepam, call your doctor immediately.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking diazepam if you are 65 years of age or older.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
talk to your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages during your treatment with diazepam. Alcohol can make the side effects of diazepam worse.
you should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways and you may become suicidal (thinking about harming or killing yourself or planning or trying to do so) while you are taking diazepam for control of seizures.  There is a chancethat you may experience changes in your mental health if you take a medication such as diazepam, but there may also be a risk that you will experience changes in your mental health if your condition is not treated. Call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: panic attacks; agitation or restlessness; new or worsening irritability, anxiety, or depression; acting on dangerous impulses; difficulty falling or staying asleep; aggressive, angry, or violent behavior; mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood); talking or thinking about wanting to hurt yourself or end your life; withdrawing from friends and family; preoccupation with death and dying; giving away prized possessions; or any other unusual changes in behavior or mood. Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor if you are unable to do so.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you take several doses per day and miss a dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Diazepam may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
tiredness
muscle weakness, unsteadiness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, hives; swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat; hoarseness; difficulty breathing or swallowing
Diazepam may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location - one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
drowsiness
confusion
slowed breathing and heartbeat
loss of consciousness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
If you are taking diazepam to control seizures and have an increase in their frequency or severity, call your doctor. If you use diazepam for seizures, carry identification (Medic Alert) stating that you have epilepsy.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Diazepam is a controlled substance. Prescriptions may be refilled only a limited number of times; ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Diazepam Intensol
®
Valium
®
Valrelease
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
11/15/2025