RSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus) Vaccine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
(
Lock
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
→
→
RSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus) Vaccine
RSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus) Vaccine
Why get vaccinated?
How is the vaccine given?
What should you tell the person who is giving the vaccine?
What are the risks from vaccination?
How can I learn more?
Brand names
Why get vaccinated?
RSV Vaccine is used to prevent lower respiratory tract disease (LRTD) that may occur with infection due to Respiratory Synctial Virus (RSV).
RSV is a common virus that causes mild, cold-like symptoms such as runny nose, decrease in appetite, coughing, sneezing, fever, wheezing. However, LRTD can be more serious in infants and older adults. Those older adults at higher risk of severe disease from RSV disease include those:
with chronic heart or lung diseases
with weakened immune systems
nursing home or long-term care facility residents
LRTD may cause shortness of breath and low oxygen levels or may also worsen chronic heart or lung disease, leading to a hospital stay and even potentially death.
RSV Vaccine does not contain the RSV virus. It contains a gene that encodes for the protein in the virus that induces an immune response. It works to prepare the body's immune system to quickly attack the RSV virus when exposed so severe illness is less likely to occur.
How is the vaccine given?
RSV Vaccine comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid to create a solution to be given intramuscularly (into the muscle) by a healthcare provider.
RSV Vaccine is given as a single dose recommended for the following individuals:
pregnant patients between 32 and 36 weeks to provide protection for the newborn through 6 months of age
all people 60 years of age or older
people between 50 and 59 years of age with risk factors for LRTD
What should you tell the person who is giving the vaccine?
Tell your vaccine provider if you:
have had an allergic reaction to this vaccine, any part of this vaccine, any other vaccine or any drug, food or substance. Tell your vaccine provider about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
have had a history of Guillain-Barre syndrome (an autoimmune disorder that causes numbness in the extremities, muscle pain, difficulty walking or standing, and paralysis often triggered by an infection) or have a weakened immune system due to a condition or medication you are receiving.
have a fever or are feeling ill.
have ever fainted in association with an injection.
are pregnant or breastfeeding. Some studies have shown a higher rates of preterm birth in pregnant patients who have received RSV Vaccine which is why it is only recommended during 32 to 36 weeks of pregnancy. Talk to your vaccine provider about risks and benefits of receiving RSV vaccine.
In some cases, your health care provider may decide to postpone vaccination to a future visit.
What are the risks from vaccination?
Side effects that have been reported with the RSV Vaccine include:
pain, bruising, redness or swelling at the site of injection
fever, headache, muscle or joint pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
numbness in the extremities, muscle pain, difficulty walking or standing, paralysis
rash, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, swelling of face or throat
People sometimes faint after medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your provider if you feel dizzy or have vision changes or ringing in the ears.
Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself. Visit
https://vaers.hhs.gov
or call
1-800-822-7967
.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions, and VAERS staff members do not give medical advice.
How can I learn more?
Read the Vaccine Information Sheet (VIS) that your vaccine provider will give you or you can obtain it at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/current-vis/index.html
Ask your healthcare provider.
Call your local or state health department.
Brand names
Abrysvo
®
Arexvy
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2025