Tovorafenib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
(
Lock
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
→
→
Tovorafenib
Tovorafenib
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tovorafenib is used to treat certain types of glioma (a cancerous brain tumor). Tovorafenib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by stopping the tumor growth.
How should this medicine be used?
Tovorafenib comes as a tablet or powder for suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. Take with or without food once a week. Take tovorafenib on the same day and at around the same time each week.
Take tovorafenib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with water; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you vomit right after you take tovorafenib, take another dose. Call your doctor if you have questions about taking another dose after vomiting.
If you are taking the powder for suspension, carefully read the manufacturer's instructions for use that comes with the medication. These instructions describe how to prepare and measure a dose of tovorafenib oral suspension. Take tovorafenib oral suspension right after it is prepared (within 15 minutes). If it is not taken within 15 minutes of being prepared, throw it away. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how to prepare or take this medication.
Your doctor may adjust your dose or  permanently stop your treatment depending on your response and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tovorafenib,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with tovorafenib. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with tovorafenib. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting tovorafenib with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking tovorafenib, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
you should know that tovorafenib may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking tovorafenib. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had bleeding problems, skin problems, or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You may need to take a pregnancy test before starting treatment and should not become pregnant while you are taking tovorafenib. If you can become pregnant, use effective non-hormonal birth control during your treatment and for 28 days after your final dose. If your partner can become pregnant, use effective non-hormonal birth control during your treatment and for 2 weeks after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner becomes pregnant while taking tovorafenib, call your doctor immediately. Tovorafenib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with tovorafenib and for 2 weeks after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking tovorafenib.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Tovorafenib may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose and remember within 3 days of when you were supposed to take it, take the missed dose as soon as possible and take the next dose on the regularly scheduled day. If it has been more than 3 days since you were supposed to take it, skip the missed dose and take the next dose on the regular scheduled day.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tovorafenib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
rash
hair color changes
tiredness
vomiting
headache
fever, cough, congestion
dry skin
constipation
nausea
diarrhea
stomach pain
mouth sores
infection of the skin around the fingernails or toenails
swelling of the eyes, hands, arms, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
unusual bleeding or bruising; headache, dizziness or feeling weak; coughing up blood or blood clots; vomiting blood or vomit looking like coffee grounds; or red or tarry-looking black stools
rash, skin bumps, acne, blisters, peeling or red, irritated skin
pain in right side of stomach, yellowing of skin or whites of eyes, dark urine, nausea or vomiting, loss of appetite, tiredness, bruising, bleeding
Tovorafenib may cause slowed growth in children. Your child's doctor will monitor your child's development carefully. Talk to your doctor about the risks of giving this medication to your child.
Tovorafenib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Tablets should stay in the blister pack they come in until it is time to take your dose.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location - one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with tovorafenib. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to tovorafenib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ojmeda
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2025