Edoxaban: MedlinePlus Drug Information
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
(
Lock
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
→
→
Edoxaban
Edoxaban
pronounced as (e dox' a ban)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
If you have atrial fibrillation (a condition where the heart beats irregularly, and can lead to blood clots and stroke) and are taking edoxaban to help prevent strokes or serious blood clots, you are at a higher risk of having a stroke after you stop taking this medication. Do not stop taking edoxaban without talking to your doctor. Continue to take edoxaban even if you feel well. Be sure to refill your prescription before you run out of medication so that you will not miss any doses of edoxaban. If you need to stop taking edoxaban, your doctor may prescribe another anticoagulant (''blood thinner'') to help prevent blood clots and lower your risk of stroke.
If you have epidural or spinal anesthesia or a shot in your spine while taking a 'blood thinner' such as edoxaban, you could get a blood clot near your spine that can cause paralysis. Tell your doctor if you have a tube in your spine or if you have had spine problems, back surgery, or more than one spinal shot. Tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are taking anagrelide; aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen, indomethacin, ketoprofen, or naproxen; cilostazol; clopidogrel; dipyridamole; eptifibatide; heparin; prasugrel; ticagrelor; ticlopidine; tirofiban, or warfarin. Call your doctor immediately if you experience back pain, muscle weakness, numbness or tingling (especially in your legs), trouble controlling your bowels or bladder, or not being able to move your legs.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order a test to check how well your kidneys are working before and periodically during your treatment with edoxaban.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the Medication Guide. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about risks of taking edoxaban.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Edoxaban is used to:
prevent strokes or blood clots in certain people who have atrial fibrillation (a condition where  the heart beats irregularly and can lead to clots and stroke).
treat deep vein thrombosis (DVT; a blood clot, usually in the leg) and pulmonary embolism (PE; a blood clot in the lung).
Edoxaban is in a class of medications called factor Xa inhibitors. It works by blocking  a natural substance that helps blood clots to form.
How should this medicine be used?
Edoxaban comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take with or without food once a day. Take edoxaban at around the same time every day.
Take edoxaban exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you are unable to swallow the tablets, crush and mix them with 2 to 3 ounces (60 to 90 mL) of water or applesauce. Take the mixture immediately.
If you have a gastric tube, the tablets can be crushed and mixed in water and given through the tube. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how you should take the medication. Follow those directions carefully.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking edoxaban,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or
any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the
allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking edoxaban.   Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have heavy bleeding that will not stop. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take edoxaban.
tell your doctor if you weigh 132 pounds (60 kilograms) or less and if you have or have ever had any type of bleeding problem, a mechanical heart valve, antiphospholipid syndrome (APS, an autoimmune disorder that causes blood clots), cancer of the stomach or intestine, or heart, kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking edoxaban, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking edoxaban.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it on the same day. However, if it is the next day, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Edoxaban may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
rash
unusual tiredness or weakness
dizziness
pale skin
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, stop taking edoxaban and call your doctor immediately:
bleeding gums
nosebleeds
heavy vaginal bleeding
red, pink, or brown urine
red or black, tarry stools
coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds
Edoxaban may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location - one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
unusual bleeding or bruising
bloody, black, or tarry stools
blood in urine
coughing up or vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds
What other information should I know?
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking edoxaban.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Savaysa
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2025