Fluphenazine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
(
Lock
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
→
→
Fluphenazine
Fluphenazine
pronounced as (floo fen' a zeen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Older adults with dementia (loss of memory and brain function) may have an increased chance of death if treated with antipsychotic medications such as fluphenazine.
Fluphenazine is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of behavior problems in older adults with dementia.  Talk to the doctor who prescribed this medication if you, a family member, or someone you care for has dementia and is taking fluphenazine.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fluphenazine is an antipsychotic medication used to treat schizophrenia and psychotic symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions, and hostility. Fluphenazine is in a class of medications called antipsychotics. It works by changing the
activity of certain natural substances in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Fluphenazine comes as a tablet, elixir (liquid), and concentrate (liquid) to take by mouth. Take two or three times a day with or without food.
Take fluphenazine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you are taking fluphenazine elixir or concentrate, do not use a household spoon to measure your dose. Use the measuring syringe or dropper that came with the medication. Ask your pharmacist if you have any question about how much medication you should take or how to use the  syringe or dropper.
Dilute fluphenazine concentrate in 2 ounces (60 mL) of a liquid (tomato or fruit juice, milk, uncaffeinated soft drinks) just before taking it. Do not use beverages containing caffeine (coffee, tea, and cola) or apple juice.
Continue to take fluphenazine even if you feel well. This drug must be taken regularly for a few weeks before its full effect is felt. Do not stop taking fluphenazine without talking to your doctor, especially if you have taken large doses for a long time. Your doctor probably will want to decrease your dose gradually.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fluphenazine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other
drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what
symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with fluphenazine. Make sure you have discussed any
medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting fluphenazine with your doctor
and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking fluphenazine,
please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have a brain injury, blood problems, or liver disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take fluphenazine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glaucoma, an enlarged prostate, difficulty urinating, seizures, an overactive thyroid gland, trouble keeping your balance, or kidney or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, f you plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking fluphenazine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking fluphenazine.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Cigarette smoking may decrease the effectiveness of this drug.
you should know that fluphenazine may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Fluphenazine may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fluphenazine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, loss of appetite
weakness or tiredness
excitement or anxiety, nightmares
dry mouth
breast enlargement or discharge
late or missed menstrual period
decreased sexual ability
dizziness, feeling unsteady, or having trouble keeping your balance
problems urinating
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately
or get emergency medical treatment.
uncontrollable movements of the face, mouth, jaw, or other body parts
tongue that sticks out of the mouth, fine, worm-like tongue movements
problems with coordination, falling down
fever, chills, sore throat, or flu-like symptoms
rash, itching, redness, hives, difficulty breathing or swallowing
yellowing of the skin or eyes
changes in vision
fever; stiff muscles; sweating; confusion; sweating; or fast, pounding, or irregular
heartbeat
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location - one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to fluphenazine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Permitil
®
¶
Prolixin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
11/15/2025