Ropinirole: MedlinePlus Drug Information
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
(
Lock
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
→
→
Ropinirole
Ropinirole
pronounced as (roe pin' i role)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ropinirole is used to treat the symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD; a disorder of the nervous system that causes difficulties with movement, muscle control, and balance), including shaking of parts of the body, stiffness, slowed movements, and problems with balance. Ropinirole is also used to treat restless legs syndrome (RLS; a condition that causes discomfort in the legs and a strong urge to move the legs, especially at night and when sitting or lying down). Ropinirole is in a class of medications called dopamine agonists. It works by acting in place of dopamine, a natural substance in the brain that is needed to control movement.
How should this medicine be used?
Ropinirole comes as a tablet and an extended-release (long-acting) tablet to take by mouth. Ropinirole may be taken with food. When ropinirole is used to treat Parkinson's disease, take the regular tablet three times a day and take the extended-release tablet once daily. When ropinirole is used to treat restless legs syndrome, take the regular tablet once a day, 1 to 3 hours before bedtime.  Take ropinirole at around the same time(s) every day.
Take ropinirole exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
There are other medications that have names similar to the brand name for ropinirole. You should be sure that you receive ropinirole and not one of the similar medications each time you fill your prescription.
Swallow the extended-release tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor will start you on a low dose of ropinirole and gradually increase your dose to help control your symptoms. If you are taking ropinirole to treat Parkinson's disease, your doctor will probably not increase your dose more often than once a week. If you are taking ropinirole to treat restless legs syndrome, your doctor will probably increase your dose after 2 days, again at the end of the first week, and then not more often than once a week. It may take several weeks before you reach a dose that works for you.
Ropinirole controls the symptoms of Parkinson's disease and restless legs syndrome but does not cure these conditions. Continue to take ropinirole even if you feel well. Do not stop taking ropinirole without talking to your doctor. If you are taking ropinirole and you suddenly stop taking the medication, you may experience fever, muscle stiffness, sweating, confusion, pain, a lack of interest or concern for usual activities or things you usually care about, anxiety, depression, tiredness, difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep, and other symptoms. If your doctor asks you to stop taking ropinirole, your doctor will probably decrease your dose gradually, over 7 days.
If you stop taking ropinirole for any reason, do not start to take the medication again without talking to your doctor. Your doctor will probably want to increase your dose again gradually.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ropinirole,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other
drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what
symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking ropinirole. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have ever had an urge to gamble that was difficult to control and if you have or have ever had unexpected daytime sleepiness or a sleep disorder other than restless legs syndrome; high or low blood pressure; a psychotic disorder (mental illness that causes abnormal thinking or perceptions); or heart, liver, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking ropinirole, call your doctor. Also tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding.
you should know that ropinirole may make you drowsy or may cause you to suddenly fall asleep during your regular daily activities. You might not feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep. Do not drive a car, operate machinery, work at heights, or participate in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medication affects you. If you suddenly fall asleep while you are doing something such as watching television, talking, eating, or riding in a car, or if you become very drowsy, especially during the daytime, call your doctor.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication. Tell your doctor if you regularly drink alcohol.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Call your doctor if you start or stop smoking during your treatment with ropinirole.
you should know that some people who took or used medications such as ropinirole developed intense urges or behaviors that were compulsive or unusual for them, such as gambling, increased sexual urges or behaviors, excessive shopping, and binge eating. Call your doctor if you have an urge to gamble that is difficult to control, you have intense urges to shop, eat, have sex, or gamble, or you are unable to control your behavior. Tell your family members about this risk so that they can call the doctor if these changes have become a problem.
you should know that ropinirole may cause dizziness or lightheadedness when you get up too quickly from a sitting or lying position. This is more common when you first start taking ropinirole or with an increase in the dose of ropinirole. To avoid this problem, get out of the chair or bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you are taking regular ropinirole tablets to treat Parkinson's disease and you miss a dose, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule.
If you are taking regular ropinirole tablets to treat restless legs syndrome and you miss a dose, skip the missed dose. Take your regular dose 1 to 3 hours before your next bedtime. Do not double the next dose to make up for the missed dose.
If you are taking extended-release ropinirole tablets to treat Parkinson's disease and you miss a dose, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. Return to your regular dosing schedule the next day. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ropinirole may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting
heartburn or gas
decrease in appetite
weakness
headache
sweating or flushing
confusion
swelling of thefeet, ankles, or lower legs
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately:
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist); feeling unusually suspicious of others; confusion; aggressive or unfriendly behavior; agitation; having strange thoughts or beliefs that have no basis in reality
fainting, dizzy, lightheaded
slow, fast, or irregular heartbeat
rash; itching; hives; swelling of the face, lips, mouth, tongue, or throat; swelling of the face, lips, mouth, tongue, or throat; shortness of breath; difficulty swallowing or breathing
Some people taking ropinirole and other similar medications have developed fibrotic changes (scarring or thickening) in their lungs and heart valves.  Talk to your doctor about the risk of taking this medication.
Ropinirole may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from direct sunlight, excess heat, and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location - one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea, vomiting
dizziness, fainting
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist), nightmares, confusion, agitation
drowsiness
sweating
fear when in a small or closed space
body movements that are difficult to control
chest pain; fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
weakness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Requip
®
¶
Requip
®
XL
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
10/15/2025